<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 7: Reception of Ulysses by Alcinoüs</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Reception of Ulysses by Alcinoüs</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Return of Nausicaä to the city, followed by Ulysses⁠—Palace and garden of Alcinoüs⁠—Reception of Ulysses by the queen and her husband⁠—Narrative given by Ulysses of his voyage and shipwreck.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>So prayed Ulysses the great sufferer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strong mules bore the damsel toward the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when she reached her father’s stately halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She stopped beneath the porch. Her brothers came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around her, like in aspect to the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loosed the mules, and bore the garments in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sought her chamber, where an aged dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attendant there, an Epirote, and named</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eurymedusa, lighted her a fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She by the well-oared galleys had been brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beforetime from Epirus, and was given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To king Alcinoüs, ruler over all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phaeacia’s sons, who hearkened to his voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if he were a god. ’T was she who reared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White-armed Nausicaä in the royal halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tended her hearth, and dressed her evening meal.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now rose Ulysses up, and townward turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His steps, while friendly Pallas wrapt his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In darkness, lest someone among the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Phaeacians with unmannerly words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might call to him or ask him who he was.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And just as he was entering that fair town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue-eyed Pallas met him, in the form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a young virgin with an urn. She stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him, and Ulysses thus inquired:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Wilt thou, my daughter, guide me to the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where dwells Alcinoüs, he who rules this land?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am a stranger, who have come from far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After long hardships, and of all who dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within this realm I know not even one.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Pallas, the blue-eyed goddess, thus replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Father and stranger, I will show the house;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dwelling of my own good father stands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close by it. Follow silently, I pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will lead. Look not on any man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ask a question; for the people here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Affect not strangers, nor do oft receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With kindly welcome him who comes from far.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They trust in their swift barques, which to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Neptune’s favor, cross the mighty deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their galleys have the speed of wings or thought.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus Pallas spake, and quickly led the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He followed in her steps. They saw him not⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those trained Phaeacian seamen⁠—for the power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That led him, Pallas of the amber hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbade the sight, and threw a friendly veil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of darkness over him. Ulysses saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wondering, the haven and the gallant ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The market-place where heroes thronged, the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long, lofty, and beset with palisades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A marvel to the sight. But when they came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the king’s stately palace, thus began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue-eyed goddess, speaking to the chief:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Father and stranger, here thou seest the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which thou hast bid me show thee. Thou wilt find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The princes, nurslings of the gods, within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Royally feasting. Enter, and fear not;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bold man ever is the better man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although he come from far. Thou first of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt see the queen. Aretè is the name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people give her. She is of a stock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The very same from which Alcinoüs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king derives his lineage. For long since</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nausithoüs, its founder, was brought forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Neptune, the great Shaker of the shores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Peribaea, fairest of her sex,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And youngest daughter of Eurymedon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The large of soul, who ruled the arrogant brood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of giants, and beheld that guilty race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut off, and perished by a fate like theirs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her Neptune wooed; she bore to him a son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large-souled Nausithoüs, whom Phaeacia owned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its sovereign. To Nausithoüs were born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rhexenor and Alcinoüs. He who bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silver bow, Apollo, smote to death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rhexenor, newly wedded, in his home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He left no son, and but one daughter, named</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aretè; her Alcinoüs made his wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And honored her as nowhere else on earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is any woman honored who bears charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over a husband’s household. From their hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her children pay her reverence, and the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the people, for they look on her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if she were a goddess. When she goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abroad into the streets, all welcome her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With acclamations. Never does she fail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wise discernment, but decides disputes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindly and justly between man and man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if thou gain her favor, there is hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou mayst see thy friends once more, and stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy tall palace on thy native soil.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The blue-eyed Pallas, having spoken thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Departed o’er the barren deep. She left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pleasant isle of Scheria, and repaired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Marathon and to the spacious streets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Athens, entering there the massive halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where dwelt Erectheus, while Ulysses toward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gorgeous palace of Alcinoüs turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His steps, yet stopped and pondered ere he crossed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The threshold. For on every side beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lofty roof of that magnanimous king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A glory shone as of the sun or moon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There from the threshold, on each side, were walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of brass that led towards the inner rooms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With blue steel cornices. The doors within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The massive building were of gold, and posts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of silver on the brazen threshold stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And silver was the lintel, and above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its architrave was gold; and on each side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood gold and silver mastiffs, the rare work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Vulcan’s practised skill, placed there to guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The house of great Alcinoüs, and endowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With deathless life, that knows no touch of age.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the walls within, on either side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the threshold to the inner rooms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were firmly planted thrones on which were laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delicate mantles, woven by the hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of women. The Phaeacian princes here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were seated; here they ate and drank, and held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perpetual banquet. Slender forms of boys</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In gold upon the shapely altars stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With blazing torches in their hands to light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At eve the palace guests; while fifty maids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waited within the halls, where some in querns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ground small the yellow grain; some wove the web</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or twirled the spindle, sitting, with a quick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light motion, like the aspen’s glancing leaves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The well-wrought tissues glistened as with oil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As far as the Phaeacian race excel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In guiding their swift galleys o’er the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So far the women in their woven work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surpass all others. Pallas gives them skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In handiwork and beautiful design.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without the palace-court, and near the gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spacious garden of four acres lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hedge enclosed it round, and lofty trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flourished in generous growth within⁠—the pear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the pomegranate, and the apple-tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its fair fruitage, and the luscious fig</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And olive always green. The fruit they bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falls not, nor ever fails in winter time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor summer, but is yielded all the year.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ever-blowing west-wind causes some</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To swell and some to ripen; pear succeeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pear; to apple apple, grape to grape,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fig ripens after fig. A fruitful field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of vines was planted near; in part it lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open and basking in the sun, which dried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soil, and here men gathered in the grapes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there they trod the wine-press. Farther on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were grapes unripened yet, which just had cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flower, and others still which just began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To redden. At the garden’s furthest bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were beds of many plants that all the year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore flowers. There gushed two fountains: one of them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran wandering through the field; the other flowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the threshold to the palace-court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the people filled their vessels there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such were the blessings which the gracious gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestowed on King Alcinoüs and his house.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the great sufferer, standing there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Admired the sight; and when he had beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The whole in silent wonderment, he crossed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The threshold quickly, entering the hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the Phaeacian peers and princes poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wine from their goblets to the sleepless one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Argus-queller, to whose deity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They made the last libations when they thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of slumber. The great sufferer, concealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a thick mist, which Pallas raised and cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around him, hastened through the hall and came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to Aretè and Alcinoüs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The royal pair. Then did Ulysses clasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aretè’s knees, when suddenly the cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised by the goddess vanished. All within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace were struck mute as they beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man before them. Thus Ulysses prayed:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Aretè, daughter of the godlike chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rhexenor! to thy husband I am come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to thy knees, from many hardships borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to these guests, to whom may the good gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grant to live happily, and to hand down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each one to his own children, in his home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wealth and honors which the people’s love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestowed upon him. Grant me, I entreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An escort, that I may behold again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And soon my own dear country. I have passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long years in sorrow, far from all I love.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ended, and sat down upon the hearth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the ashes, near the fire, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were silent utterly. At length outspake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Echeneus, oldest and most eloquent chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Phaeacians; large his knowledge was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of things long past. With generous intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And speaking to the assembly, he began:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Alcinoüs, this is not a seemly sight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stranger sitting on the hearth among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cinders. All the others here await</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy order, and move not. I pray thee, raise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stranger up, and seat him on a throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Studded with silver. Be thy heralds called,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bid them mingle wine, which we may pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Jove, the god of thunders, who attends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And honors every suppliant. Let the dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who oversees the palace feast provide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our guest a banquet from the stores within.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This when the reverend king Alcinoüs heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forthwith he took Ulysses by the hand⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That man of wise devices⁠—raised him up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seated him upon a shining throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From which he bade Laodamas arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His manly son, whose seat was next to his.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now mingle wine, Protonoüs, in a vase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all within the palace, to be poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Jove, the god of thunders, who attends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And honors every suppliant.” As he spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Protonoüs mingled the delicious wines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And passed from right to left, distributing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cups to all; and when they all had poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A part to Jove, and all had drunk their fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcinoüs took the word, and thus he said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Princes and chiefs of the Phaeacians, hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I speak as my heart bids me. Since the feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is over, take your rest within your homes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-morrow shall the Senators be called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In larger concourse. We will pay our guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Due honor in the palace, worshipping</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods with solemn sacrifice. And then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will we bethink us how to send him home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with no hindrance and no hardship borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under our escort he may come again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gladly and quickly to his native land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though far away it lie, and that no wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or loss may happen to him ere he set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foot on its soil; and there must he endure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever, when his mother brought him forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fate and the unrelenting Sisters spun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the new-born. But should he prove to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the immortals who has come from heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then have the gods a different design.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For hitherto the gods have shown themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Visibly at our solemn hecatombs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sat with us, and feasted like ourselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the traveller meets with them alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They never hide themselves; for we to them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are near of kin, as near as is the race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Cyclops and the savage giant brood.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses the sagacious answered him:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay, think not so, Alcinoüs. I am not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In form or aspect as the immortals are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose habitation is the ample heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I am like whomever thou mayst know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among mankind, inured to suffering;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To them shouldst thou compare me. I could tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bitterer sorrows yet, which I have borne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such was the pleasure of the gods. But now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave me, whatever have my hardships been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take the meal before me. Naught exceeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The impatient stomach’s importunity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When even the afflicted and the sorrowful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are forced to heed its call. So even now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Midst all the sorrow that is in my heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It bids me eat and drink, and put aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thought of my misfortunes till itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be satiate. But, ye princes, with the dawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Provide for me, in my calamity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The means to reach again my native land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, after all my hardships, I would die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Willingly, could I look on my estates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My servants, and my lofty halls once more.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ended; they approved his words, and bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set forward on his homeward way the guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who spake so wisely. When they all had made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Libations and had drunk, they each withdrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sleep at home, and left the noble chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses in the palace, where with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aretè and her godlike husband sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While from the feast the maidens bore away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chargers. The white-armed Aretè then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to speak; for when she cast her eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the fair garments which Ulysses wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She knew the mantle and the tunic well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought by herself and her attendant maids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus with winged words bespake the chief:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Stranger, I first must ask thee who thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of what race of men. From whom hast thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received those garments? Sure thou dost not say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou art come from wandering o’er the sea.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ’T were hard, O sovereign lady, to relate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In order all my sufferings, for the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heaven have made them many; yet will I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell all thou askest of me, and obey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy bidding. Far within the ocean lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An island named Ogygia, where abides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calypso, artful goddess, with bright locks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daughter of Atlas, and of dreaded power.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No god consorts with her, nor any one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mortal birth. But me in my distress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some god conveyed alone to her abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, launching his white lightning, Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had cloven in the midst of the black sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My galley. There my gallant comrades all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perished, but I in both my arms held fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The keel of my good ship, and floated on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine days till, on the tenth, in the dark night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods had brought me to Ogygia’s isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where dwells Calypso of the radiant hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dreaded might, who kindly welcomed me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cherished me, and would have made my life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Immortal, and beyond the power of age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all the coming time. And there I wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven years away, still moistening with my tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ambrosial raiment which the goddess gave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the eighth year had begun its round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She counselled my departure, whether Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had so required, or she herself had changed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her purpose. On a raft made strong with clamps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She placed me, sent on board an ample store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bread and pleasant wine, and made me put</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ambrosial garments on, and gave a soft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And favorable wind. For seventeen days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I held my steady course across the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the eighteenth day the shadowy heights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of your own isle appeared, and then my heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ill-fated as I was, rejoiced. Yet still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was I to struggle with calamities</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent by earth-shaking Neptune, who called up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winds against me, and withstood my way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stirred the boundless ocean to its depths.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor did the billows surfer me to keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My place, but swept me, groaning, from the raft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose planks they scattered. Still I labored through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The billowy depth, and swam, till wind and wave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drove me against your coast. As there I sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To land, I found the surges hurrying me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against huge rocks that lined the frightful shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, turning back, I swam again and reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A river and the landing-place I wished.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smooth, without rocks, and sheltered from the wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I swooned, but soon revived. Ambrosial night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came on. I left the Jove-descended stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slept among the thickets, drawing round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My limbs the withered leaves, while on my lids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A deity poured bounteously the balm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of slumber. All night long, among the leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I slept, with all that sorrow in my heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till morn, till noon. Then as the sun went down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The balmy slumber left me, and I saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy daughter’s handmaids sporting on the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her among them, goddess-like. To her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I came a suppliant, nor did she receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My suit unkindly as a maid so young</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might do, for youth is foolish. She bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Food and red wine abundantly, and gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I had bathed, the garments I have on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus is my tale of suffering truly told.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then Alcinoüs answered him and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Stranger, one duty hath my child o’erlooked⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bid thee follow hither with her maids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thou didst sue to her the first of all.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, thus replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Blame not for that, O hero, I entreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy faultless daughter. She commanded me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To follow with her maids, but I refrained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For fear and awe of thee, lest, at the sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou mightest be displeased; for we are prone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dark misgivings⁠—we, the sons of men.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again Alcinoüs spake: “The heart that beats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within my bosom is not rashly moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wrath, and better is the temperate mood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This must I say, O Father Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pallas and Apollo! I could wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, being as thou art, and of like mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With me, thou wouldst receive to be thy bride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My daughter, and be called my son-in-law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here abide. A palace I would give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And riches, shouldst thou willingly remain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against thy will let no Phaeacian dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep thee here. May Father Jove forbid!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that thou mayst be sure of my intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I name to-morrow for thy voyage home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleep in thy bed till then; and they shall row</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the calm sea thy galley, till thou come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thine own land and home, or wheresoe’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt, though further off the coast should be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than far Euboea, most remote of lands⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So do the people of our isle declare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who saw it when they over sea conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair-haired Rhadamanthus, on his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To visit Tityus, son of Earth. They went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither, accomplishing with little toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their voyage in the compass of a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brought the hero to our isle again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now shalt thou learn, and in thy heart confess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How much our galleys and our youths excel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With bladed oars to stir the whirling brine”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the king, and the great sufferer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses heard with gladness, and preferred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A prayer, and called on Jupiter and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Grant, Father Jove, that all the king has said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May be fulfilled! so shall his praise go forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the foodful earth, and never die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I shall see my native land again.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So they conferred. White-armed Aretè spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade her maidens in the portico</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Place couches, and upon them lay fair rugs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of purple dye, and tapestry on these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for the outer covering shaggy cloaks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth from the hall they issued, torch in hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when with speed the ample bed was made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They came and summoned thus the chief to rest:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Rise, stranger, go to rest; thy bed is made.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus spake the maidens, and the thought of sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was welcome to Ulysses. So that night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his deep couch the noble sufferer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slumbered beneath the sounding portico.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcinoüs laid him down in a recess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his lofty palace, near to whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The queen his consort graced the marriage-bed.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
