<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 8: Festivals in Honor of Ulysses</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-8" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Festivals in Honor of Ulysses</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">A general council of the Phaeacians, in which it is determined to send Ulysses home to Ithaca⁠—A solemn feast⁠—Lay of the Trojan War, sung by Demodocus, the minstrel⁠—Public games⁠—Ulysses conquers in throwing the discus⁠—The amour of Mars and Venus sung by Demodocus⁠—His song of the Trojan horse and the fall of Troy.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>When Morn appeared, the rosy-fingered child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Dawn, Alcinoüs, mighty and revered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose from his bed. Ulysses, noble chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spoiler of cities, also left his couch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcinoüs, mighty and revered, went forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before, and led him to the market-place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Phaeacians, built beside the fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there on polished stones they took their seats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near to each other. Pallas, who now seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A herald of the wise Alcinoüs, went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all the city, planning how to send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Magnanimous Ulysses to his home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came and stood by every chief and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Leaders and chiefs of the Phaeacians, come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speedily to the market-place, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear of the stranger who from wandering o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deep has come where wise Alcinoüs holds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His court; in aspect he is like the gods.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and every mind and heart was moved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the market-place and all its seats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were quickly filled with people. Many gazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Admiring, on Laertes’ well-graced son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For on his face and form had Pallas shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A glory, and had made him seem more tall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of an ampler bulk, that he might find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Favor with the Phaeacians, and be deemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worthy of awe and able to achieve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The many feats which the Phaeacian chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To try the stranger’s prowess, might propose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now when all the summoned had arrived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcinoüs to the full assembly spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Princes and chiefs of the Phaeacians, hear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I speak the promptings of my heart. This guest⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know him not⁠—has come to my abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wanderer⁠—haply from the tribes who dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the far East, or haply from the West⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And asked an escort and safe-conduct home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let us make them ready, as our wont</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has ever been. No stranger ever comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across my threshold who is suffered long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pine for his departure. Let us draw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dark-hulled ship down to the holy sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On her first voyage. Let us choose her crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the people, two-and-fifty youths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our best seamen. Then make fast the oars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the benches, leave them there, and come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into our palace and partake in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A feast which I will liberally spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all of you. This I command the youths;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you, ye sceptred princes, come at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my fair palace, that we there may pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The honors due our guest; let none refuse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call also the divine Demodocus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bard, on whom a deity bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ample measure the sweet gift of song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delightful when the spirit prompts the lay.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and led the way; the sceptred train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of princes followed him. The herald sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime the sacred bard. The chosen youths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fifty-and-two betook them to the marge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the unfruitful sea; and when they reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ship and beach they drew the dark hull down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the deep water, put the mast on board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the ship’s sails, and fitted well the oars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the leathern rings, and, having moored</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their bark in the deep water, went with speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To their wise monarch in his spacious halls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There portico and court and hall were thronged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With people, young and old in multitude;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there Alcinoüs sacrificed twelve sheep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eight white-toothed swine, and two splay-footed beeves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these they flayed, and duly dressed, and made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A noble banquet ready. Then appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herald, leading the sweet singer in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him whom the Muse with an exceeding love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had cherished, and had visited with good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And evil, quenched his eyesight and bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweetness of song. Pontonoüs mid the guests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Placed for the bard a silver-studded throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against a lofty column hung his harp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above his head, and taught him how to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take it down. Near him the herald set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A basket and fair table, and a cup</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wine, that he might drink when he desired;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then all put forth their hands and shared the feast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when their thirst and hunger were allayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Muse inspired the bard to sing the praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heroes; ’t was a song whose fame had reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the high heaven, a story of the strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between Ulysses and Achilles, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus, wrangling at a solemn feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made for the gods. They strove with angry words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Agamemnon, king of men, rejoiced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear the noblest of the Achaian host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contending; for all this had been foretold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him in sacred Pythia by the voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phoebus, when the monarch to inquire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the oracle had crossed the rock which formed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its threshold. Then began the train of woes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which at the will of sovereign Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Befell the sons of Ilium and of Greece.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So sang renowned Demodocus. Meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses took into his brawny hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An ample veil of purple, drawing it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around his head to hide his noble face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ashamed that the Phaeacians should behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tears that flowed so freely from his lids.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the sacred bard had ceased his song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wiped the tears away and laid the veil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aside, and took a double beaker filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wine, and poured libations to the gods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet when again the minstrel sang, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chiefs of the Phaeacian people, charmed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear his music, bade the strain proceed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again Ulysses hid his face and wept.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No other eye beheld the tears he shed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcinoüs only watched him, and perceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His grief, and heard the sighs he drew, and spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Phaeacians, lovers of the sea:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now that we all, to our content, have shared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The feast and heard the harp, whose notes so well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suit with a liberal banquet, let us forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And try our skill in games, that this our guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning to his country, may relate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How in the boxing and the wrestling match,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In leaping and in running, we excel.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and went before; they followed him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then did the herald hang the clear-toned harp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again on high, and taking by the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Demodocus, he led him from the place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guiding him in the way which just before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The princes of Phaeacia trod to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The public games. Into the market-place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They went; a vast innumerable crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pressed after. Then did many a valiant youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arise⁠—Acroneus and Ocyalus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Elatreus, Nauteus, Prymneus, after whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upstood Anchialus, and by his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eretmeus, Ponteus, Proreus, Thoön, rose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anabasineüs and Amphialus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A son of Polyneius, Tecton’s son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then rose the son of Naubolus, like Mars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In warlike port, Euryalus by name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And goodliest both in feature and in form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all Phaeacia’s sons save one alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laodamas the faultless. Next three sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of King Alcinoüs rose: Laodamas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Halius, and Clytoneius, like a god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In aspect. Some of these began the games,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contending in the race. For them a course</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was marked from goal to goal. They darted forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once and swiftly, raising, as they ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dust along the plain. The swiftest there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Clytoneius in the race. As far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As mules, in furrowing the fallow ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gain on the steers, he ran before the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And reached the crowd, and left them all behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others in wrestling strove laboriously⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here Euryalus excelled them all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in the leap Amphialus was first;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Elatreus flung the quoit with firmest hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the boxer’s art Laodamas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The monarch’s valiant son, was conqueror.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This when the admiring multitude had seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus spake the monarch’s son, Laodamas:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And now, my friends, inquire we of our guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he has learned and practised feats like these.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he is not ill-made in legs and thighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in both arms, in firmly planted neck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strong-built frame; nor does he seem to lack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A certain youthful vigor, though impaired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By many hardships⁠—for I know of naught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That more severely tries the strongest man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And breaks him down, than perils of the sea.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Euryalus replied: “Laodamas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well hast thou said, and rightly: go thou now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And speak to him thyself, and challenge him.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The son of King Alcinoüs, as he heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came forward, and bespake Ulysses thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou also, guest and father, try these feats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou perchance wert trained to them. I think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou must be skilled in games, since there is not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A greater glory for a man while yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lives on earth than what he hath wrought out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By strenuous effort, with his feet and hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Try, then, thy skill, and give no place to grief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not long will thy departure be delayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy bark is launched; the crew are ready here.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why press me, O Laodamas! to try</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These feats, when all my thoughts are of my woes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not of games? I, who have borne so much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pain and toil, sit pining for my home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In your assembly, supplicating here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your king and all the people of your land.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake Euryalus with chiding words:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Stranger, I well perceive thou canst not boast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As many others can, of skill in games;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou art one of those who dwell in ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many benches, rulers o’er a crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sailors⁠—a mere trader looking out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For freight, and watching o’er the wares that form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cargo. Thou hast doubtless gathered wealth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By rapine, and art surely no athlete.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, frowned and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Stranger, thou speakest not becomingly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But like a man who recks not what he says.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods bestow not equally on all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gifts that men desire⁠—the grace of form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mind, the eloquence. One man to sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is undistinguished, but on him the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestow the power of words. All look on him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gladly; he knows whereof he speaks; his speech</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is mild and modest; he is eminent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all assemblies, and, whene’er he walks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city, men regard him as a god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another in the form he wears is like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The immortals, yet has he no power to speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Becoming words. So thou hast comely looks⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A god would not have shaped thee otherwise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than we behold thee⁠—yet thy wit is small,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy unmannerly words have angered me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even to the heart. Not quite unskilled am I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In games, as thou dost idly talk, and once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I could trust my youth and my strong arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think that in these contests I was deemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the first. But I am now pressed down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With toil and sorrow; much have I endured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wars with heroes and on stormy seas.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet even thus, a sufferer as I am,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will I essay these feats; for sharp have been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy words, and they provoke me to the proof.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and rising with his mantle on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He seized a broader, thicker, heavier quoit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By no small odds, than the Phaeacians used,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swinging it around with vigorous arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sent it forth; it sounded as it went;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Phaeacians, skilful with the oar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sail, bent low as o’er them, from his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew the swift stone beyond the other marks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pallas, in a human form, set up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mark where it descended, and exclaimed:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Stranger! a blind man, groping here, could find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy mark full easily, since it is not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the many, but beyond them all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then fear thou nothing in this game at least;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For no Phaeacian here can throw the quoit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As far as thou, much less exceed thy cast.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake; Ulysses the great sufferer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard, and rejoiced to know he had a friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that great circle. With a lighter heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus said the chief to the Phaeacian crowd:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Follow that cast, young men, and I will send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another stone, at once, as far, perchance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or further still. If there are others yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who feel the wish, let them come forward here⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For much your words have chafed me⁠—let them try</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With me the boxing or the wrestling match,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or foot-race; there is naught that I refuse⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Any of the Phaeacians. I except</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laodamas; he is my host, and who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would enter such a contest with a friend?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A senseless, worthless man is he who seeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A strife like this with one who shelters him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a strange land; he mars the welcome given.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As for the rest, there is no rival here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom I reject or scorn; for I would know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their prowess, and would try my own with theirs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before you all. At any of the games</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Practised among mankind I am not ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever they may be. The polished bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I well know how to handle. I should be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first to strike a foe by arrows sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among a hostile squadron, though there stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A crowd of fellow-warriors by my side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And also aimed their shafts. The only one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose skill in archery excelled my own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When we Achaians drew the bow at Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Philoctetes; to all other men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On earth that live by bread I hold myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Superior. Yet I claim no rivalry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With men of ancient times⁠—with Hercules</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Eurytus the Oechalian, who defied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The immortals to a contest with the bow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore was mighty Eurytus cut off.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo, angry to be challenged, slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero. I can hurl a spear beyond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where others send an arrow. All my fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is for my feet, so weakened have I been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the stormy waves with want of food</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At sea, and thus my limbs have lost their strength.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ended here, and all the assembly sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In silence; King Alcinoüs only spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Stranger, since thou dost speak without offence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And but to assert the prowess of thine arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Indignant that amid the public games</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This man should rail at thee, and since thy wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is only that all others who can speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Becomingly may not in time to come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dispraise that prowess, now, then, heed my words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And speak of them within thy palace halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To other heroes when thou banquetest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside thy wife and children, and dost think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of things that we excel in⁠—arts which Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives us, transmitted from our ancestors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In boxing and in wrestling small renown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have we, but we are swift of foot; we guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our galleys bravely o’er the deep; we take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delight in feasts; we love the harp, the dance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And change of raiment, the warm bath and bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise, then, Phaeacian masters of the dance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tread your measures, that our guest may tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friends at home how greatly we surpass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All other men in seamanship, the race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dance, the art of song. Go, one of you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bring Demodocus his clear-toned harp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That somewhere in our palace has been left.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus spake the godlike king. The herald rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring the sweet harp from the royal house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the nine umpires also rose, who ruled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The games; they smoothed the floor, and made the ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gazers wider. Next the herald came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brought Demodocus the clear-toned harp.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The minstrel went into the midst, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered the graceful dancers; they were youths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In life’s first bloom. With even steps they smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred floor. Ulysses, gazing, saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The twinkle of their feet and was amazed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The minstrel struck the chords and gracefully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began the lay: he sang the loves of Mars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Venus of the glittering crown, who first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had met each other stealthily beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The roof of Vulcan. Mars with many gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Won her, and wronged her spouse, the King of Fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But from the Sun, who saw their guilt, there came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A messenger to Vulcan. When he heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unwelcome tidings, planning his revenge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hastened to his smithy, where he forged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chains that no power might loosen or might break,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made to hold fast forever. When the snare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all its parts was finished, he repaired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Angry with Mars, to where the marriage-bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood in his chamber. To the posts he tied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The encircling chains on every side, and made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fast to the ceiling many, like the threads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spun by the spider, which no eye could see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even of the gods, so artfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wrought them. Then, as soon as he had wrapped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The snare about the bed, he feigned to go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Lemnos nobly built, most dear to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the lands. But Mars, the god who holds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shining reins, had kept no careless watch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when he saw the great artificer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Depart he went with speed to Vulcan’s house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drawn thither by the love of her who wears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glittering crown. There Cytherea sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrived that moment from a visit paid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entering, he took her by the hand and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Come, my beloved, let us to the couch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vulcan is here no longer; he is gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And is among the Sintians, men who speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A barbarous tongue, in Lemnos far away.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and she approved his words, and both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay down upon the bed, when suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The network, wrought by Vulcan’s skilful hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught them, and clasped them round, nor could they lift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or move a limb, and saw that no escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was possible. And now approached the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Fire, returning ere he reached the isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Lemnos, for the Sun in his behalf</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept watch and told him all. He hastened home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In bitterness of heart, but when he reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The threshold stopped. A fury without bounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Possessed him, and he shouted terribly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And called aloud on all the gods of heaven:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Father Jove, and all ye blessed ones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And deathless! Come, for here is what will move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your laughter, yet is not to be endured.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove’s daughter, Venus, thus dishonors me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lame as I am, and loves the butcher Mars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he is well to look at, and is sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of foot, while I am weakly⁠—but for this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are none but my two parents to be blamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who never should have given me birth. Behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where lie embraced the lovers in my bed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hateful sight. Yet they will hardly take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even a short slumber there, though side by side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enamored as they are; nor will they both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be drowsy very soon. The net and chains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will hold them till her father shall restore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the large gifts which, on our marriage-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I gave him to possess the impudent minx</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His daughter, who is fair, indeed, but false.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and to the brazen palace flocked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods; there Neptune came, who shakes the earth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There came beneficent Hermes; there too came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo, archer-god; the goddesses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through womanly reserve, remained at home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime the gods, the givers of all good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood in the entrance; and as they beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cunning snare of Vulcan, there arose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Infinite laughter from the blessed ones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one of them bespake his neighbor thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Wrong prospers not; the slow o’ertakes the swift.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vulcan the slow has trapped the fleetest god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon Olympus, Mars; though lame himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His net has taken the adulterer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who now must pay the forfeit of his crime.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So talked they with each other. Then the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jove, Apollo, thus to Hermes said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hermes, thou son and messenger of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bountiful of gifts, couldst thou endure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fettered with such strong chains as these, to lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a couch with Venus at thy side?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The herald-god, the Argus-queller, thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made answer: “Nay, I would that it were so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O archer-king, Apollo; I could bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chains thrice as many, and of infinite strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the gods and all the goddesses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might come to look upon me, I would keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My place with golden Venus at my side.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and all the immortals laughed to hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neptune alone laughed not, but earnestly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prayed Vulcan, the renowned artificer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To set Mars free, and spake these winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Release thy prisoner. What thou dost require</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I promise here⁠—that he shall make to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Due recompense in presence of the gods.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Illustrious Vulcan. answered: “Do not lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth-shaking Neptune, this command on me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since little is the worth of pledges given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For worthless debtors. How could I demand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My right from thee among the assembled gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If Mars, set free, escape from debt and chains?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again the god who shakes the earth replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Vulcan, though Mars deny the forfeit due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take to flight, it shall be paid by me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again illustrious Vulcan said: “Thy word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I ought not and I seek not to decline.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and then the might of Vulcan loosed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The net, and, freed from those strong fetters, both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prisoners sprang away. Mars flew to Thrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laughter-loving Venus to the isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Cyprus, where at Paphos stand her grove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And perfumed altar. Here the Graces gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bath, anointed with ambrosial oil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her limbs⁠—such oil as to the eternal gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lends a fresh beauty, and arrayed her last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In graceful robes, a marvel to behold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So sang the famous bard, while inly pleased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses heard, and pleased were all the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phaeacia’s sons, expert with oar and sail.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Alcinoüs called his sons Laodamas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Halius forth, and bade them dance alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For none of all the others equalled them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then taking a fair purple ball, the work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of skilful Polybus, and, bending back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One flung it toward the shadowy clouds on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other springing upward easily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grasped it before he touched the ground again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when they thus had tossed the ball awhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They danced upon the nourishing earth, and oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Changed places with each other, while the youths,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That stood within the circle filled the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their applauses; mighty was the din.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then great Ulysses to Alcinoüs said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O King Alcinoüs! mightiest of the race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whom thou hast engaged that they excel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All others in the dance, what thou hast said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is amply proved. I look and am amazed.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Well pleased Alcinoüs the mighty heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus to his seafaring people spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Leaders and chiefs of the Phaeacians, hear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise seems the stranger. Haste we to bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gifts that may well beseem his liberal hests.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twelve honored princes in our land bear sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thirteenth prince am I. Let each one bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A well-bleached cloak, a tunic, and beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of precious gold a talent. Let them all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be brought at once, that, having seen them here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our guest may with a cheerful heart partake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The evening meal. And let Euryalus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who spake but now so unbecomingly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appease him both with words and with a gift.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; they all approved, and each one sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His herald with a charge to bring the gifts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus Euryalus addressed the king:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O King Alcinoüs, mightiest of our race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will obey thee, and will seek to appease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our guest. This sword of brass will I bestow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hilt of silver, and an ivory sheath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New wrought, which he may deem a gift of price.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and gave the silver-studded sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into his hand, and spake these winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Stranger and father, hail! If any word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hath been uttered gave offence, may storms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweep it away forever. May the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give thee to see thy wife again, and reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy native land, where all thy sufferings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this long absence from thy friends shall end!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, thus replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hail also, friend! and may the gods confer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thee all happiness, and may the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never arrive when thou shalt miss the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Placed in my hands with reconciling word!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and slung the silver-studded sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his shoulders. Now the sun went down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the rich presents were already brought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble heralds came and carried them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the palace of Alcinoüs, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His blameless sons received and ranged them all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fair array before the queenly dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their mother. Meantime had the mighty king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcinoüs to his palace led the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where they who followed took the lofty seats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus Alcinoüs to Aretè said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bring now a coffer hither, fairly shaped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The best we have, and lay a well-bleached cloak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tunic in it; set upon the fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A brazen caldron for our guest, to warm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The water of his bath, that having bathed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And viewed the gifts which the Phaeacian chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have brought him, ranged in order, he may sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delighted at the banquet and enjoy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The music. I will give this beautiful cup</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold, that he, in memory of me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May daily in his palace pour to Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Libations, and to all the other gods.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spake; Aretè bade her maidens haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To place an ample tripod on the fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forthwith upon the blazing fire they set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A laver with three feet, and in it poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Water, and heaped fresh fuel on the flames.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flames crept up the vessel’s swelling sides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And warmed the water. Meantime from her room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aretè brought a beautiful chest, in which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She laid the presents destined for her guest⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Garments and gold which the Phaeacians gave⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid the cloak and tunic with the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus in winged words addressed the chief:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Look to the lid thyself, and cast a cord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around it, lest, upon thy voyage home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou suffer loss, when haply thou shalt take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pleasant slumber in the dark-hulled ship.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, heard, and straight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fitted to its place the lid, and wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knotted artfully around the chest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cord, as queenly Circè long before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had taught him. Then to call him to the bath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The housewife of the palace came. He saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gladly the steaming laver, for not oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had he been cared for thus, since he had left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dwelling of the nymph with amber hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calypso, though attended while with her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if he were a god. Now when the maids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had seen him bathed, and had anointed him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With oil, and put his sumptuous mantle on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tunic, forth he issued from the bath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came to those who sat before their wine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nausicaä, goddess-like in beauty, stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside a pillar of that noble roof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looking on Ulysses as he passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Admired, and said to him in winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Stranger, farewell, and in thy native land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remember thou hast owed thy life to me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answering said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nausicaä, daughter of the large-souled king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcinoüs! so may Jove, the Thunderer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Husband of Juno, grant that I behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My home, returning safe, as I will make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee as to a goddess day by day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My prayer; for, lady, thou hast saved my life.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and near Alcinoüs took his place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a throne. And now they served the feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To each, and mingled wine. A herald led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither the gentle bard Demodocus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom all the people honored. Him they placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amidst the assembly, where he leaned against</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lofty column. Sage Ulysses then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carved from the broad loin of a white-tusked boar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A part, where yet a mass of flesh remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bordered with fat, and to the herald said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bear this, O herald, to Demodocus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he may eat. Him, even in my grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will I embrace, for worthily the bards</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are honored and revered o’er all the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By every race of men. The Muse herself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath taught them song; she loves the minstrel tribe.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the herald laid the flesh before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Demodocus the hero, who received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gift well pleased. Then all the guests put forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hands and shared the viands on the board;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when their thirst and hunger were allayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to the minstrel sage Ulysses spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Demodocus, above all other men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I give thee praise, for either has the Muse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove’s daughter, or Apollo, visited</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And taught thee. Truly hast thou sung the fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Achaian warriors⁠—what they did</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And suffered⁠—all their labors as if thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hadst been among them, or hadst heard the tale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From an eye-witness. Now, I pray, proceed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sing the invention of the wooden horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made by Epeius with Minerva’s aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the chief Ulysses artfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conveyed into the Trojan citadel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With armed warriors in its womb to lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city waste. And I, if thou relate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The story rightly, will at once declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all that largely hath some bounteous god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestowed on thee the holy gift of song.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the poet felt the inspiring god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sang, beginning where the Argives hurled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firebrands among their tents, and sailed away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their good galleys, save the band that sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside renowned Ulysses in the horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concealed from sight, amid the Trojan crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who now had drawn it to the citadel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So there it stood, while, sitting round it, talked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men of Troy, and wist not what to do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By turns three counsels pleased them⁠—to hew down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hollow trunk with the remorseless steel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or drag it to a height, and cast it thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Headlong among the rocks; or, lastly, leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The enormous image standing and unharmed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An offering to appease the gods. And this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last was done; for so had fate decreed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they should be destroyed whene’er their town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should hold within its walls the horse of wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which the mightiest of the Argives came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the sons of Troy to smite and slay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then sang the bard how, issuing from the womb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that deceitful horse, the sons of Greece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid Ilium waste; how each in different ways</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ravaged the town, while, terrible as Mars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, joined with Menelaus, sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace of Deiphobus, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maintained a desperate battle, till the aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mighty Pallas made the victory his.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So sang renowned Demodocus; the strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Melted to tears Ulysses, from whose lids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They dropped and wet his cheeks. As when a wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weeps her beloved husband, slain before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His town and people, fighting to defend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Them and his own dear babes from deadly harm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sees him gasp and die, and at the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She falls with piercing cries upon his corpse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime the victors beat her on the back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shoulders with their spears, and bear her off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To toil and grieve in slavery, where her cheeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that long bitter sorrow lose their bloom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So from the eyelids of Ulysses fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tears, yet fell unnoticed by them all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save that Alcinoüs, sitting at his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw them, and heard his heavy sighs, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bespake his people, masters of the oar:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Princes and chiefs of the Phaeacian race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give ear. Let now Demodocus lay by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His clear-toned harp. The matter of his song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delights not all alike. Since first we sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At meat, and since our noble bard began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lay, our guest has never ceased to grieve;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some mighty sorrow weighs upon his heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now let the bard refrain, that we may all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enjoy the banquet, both our guest and we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who welcome him, for it is fitting thus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now are all things for our worthy guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made ready, both the escort and these gifts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pledges of our kind regard. A guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A suppliant, is a brother, even to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who bears a heart not easy to be moved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer, then, keep back with studied art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I shall ask; ’t were better far to speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With freedom. Tell the name thy mother gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy father, and all those who dwell within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round thy city. For no living man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is nameless from the time that he is born.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Humble or high in station, at their birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The parents give them names. Declare thy land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy people, and thy city, that our ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May learn, and bear thee to the place; for here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In our Phaeacian ships no pilots are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor rudders, as in ships of other lands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ours know the thoughts and the intents of men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To them all cities and all fertile coasts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inhabited by men are known; they cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great sea scudding fast, involved in mist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And darkness, with no fear of perishing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or meeting harm. I heard Nausithoüs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father, say that Neptune was displeased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With us for safely bearing to their homes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many men, and that he would destroy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In after time some good Phaeacian ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning from a convoy, in the waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the dark sea, and leave her planted there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mountain huge and high, before our town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So did the aged chieftain prophesy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The god, as best may please him, will fulfil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father’s words, or leave them unfulfilled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now tell me truly whither thou hast roamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what the tribes of men that thou hast seen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell which of them are savage, rude, unjust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And which are hospitable and revere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blessed gods. Declare why thou didst weep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sigh when hearing what unhappy fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Befell the Argive and Achaian host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And town of Troy. The gods decreed it; they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ordain destruction to the sons of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A theme of song thereafter. Hadst thou not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some valiant kinsman who was slain at Troy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A son-in-law? the father of thy wife?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nearest of all are they to us, save those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our own blood. Or haply might it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some bosom-friend, one eminently graced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all that wins our love; for not less dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than if he were a brother should we hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wise and gentle man who is our friend.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
