<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 2: Departure of Telemachus from Ithica</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Departure of Telemachus from Ithica</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The chief men of Ithica assembled by Telemachus—His complaint of the suitors—Their attempt to justify themselves⁠—Prophecy of the return of Ulysses by the seer, Halitherses⁠—Request of Telemachus for a vessel to visit Pylos and Sparta, in quest of his father, granted by the assembly⁠—Preparations for his departure.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Now when the Morning, child of Dawn, appeared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dear son of Ulysses left his bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And put his garments on. His trenchant sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hung upon his shoulders, and made fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His shapely sandals to his shining feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And issued from his chamber like a god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once he bade the clear-voiced heralds call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long-haired Greeks to council. They obeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly the chiefs assembled, and when all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were at the appointed place, Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went to the council, bearing in his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A brazen spear, yet went he not alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two swift dogs followed him, while Pallas shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heavenly beauty over him, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Admired him as he came. He took the seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his great father, and the aged men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made way for him. And then Aegyptius spake⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hero bowed with age, who much had seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And known. His son, the warlike Antiphus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went with the great Ulysses in his fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To courser-breeding Troy, and afterward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cruel Cyclops, in the vaulted cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slew him for his last meal. Three other sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were, and one of these, Eurynomus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was of the suitor train; the others took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charge of their father’s acres. Never yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had he forgotten his lost son or ceased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To grieve for him, and as he spoke he wept</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear, men of Ithaca, what I shall say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No council, no assembly, have we held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since great Ulysses in his roomy ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Departed from our isle. Who now is he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That summons us? On which of our young men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or elders presses this necessity?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it belike that one of you has heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of an approaching foe, and can declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tidings clearly? Or would he propose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And urge some other matter which concerns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The public weal? A just and generous mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I deem is his, and ’tis my hope that Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will bring to pass the good at which he aims.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus he spake Ulysses’ son rejoiced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his auspicious words, nor longer kept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His seat, but, yielding to an inward force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose midst them all to speak, while in his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pisenor, the sagacious counsellor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And herald, placed the sceptre. Then he turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the old man, Aegyptius, speaking thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O aged man, not far from thee is he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who called this council, as thou soon shalt know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine chiefly is the trouble; I have brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No news of an approaching foe, which I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was first to hear, and would declare to all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor urge I other matters which concern</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The public weal; my own necessity⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The evil that has fallen on my house⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Constrains me; it is twofold. First, that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have lost an excellent father, who was king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among you, and ruled o’er you with a sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As gentle as a father’s. Greater yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the next evil, and will soon o’erthrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My house and waste my substance utterly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suitors, the sons of those who, in our isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hold the chief rank, importunately press</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round my unwilling mother. They disdain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ask her of Icarius, that the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her father may endow her, and bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His daughter on the man who best may gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His favor, but with every day they come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into our palace, sacrificing here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oxen and sheep and fatling goats, and hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High festival, and drink the purple wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unstinted, with unbounded waste; for here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is no man like Ulysses to repel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mischief from my house. Not such are we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he was, to resist the wrong. We pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For weaklings, immature in valor, yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I had but the power, assuredly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would resist, for by these men are done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insufferable things, nor does my house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perish with honor. Ye yourselves should feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shame at these doings; ye should dread reproach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From those who dwell around us, and should fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The offended gods, lest they repay these crimes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With vengeance. I beseech you, O my friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both by Olympian Jove, and her by whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Councils of men are summoned and dissolved⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goddess Themis⁠—that ye all refrain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave me to my grief alone, unless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, my great father, may have done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrong in his anger to the gallant Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which ye, by prompting men to acts like these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek to avenge on me. Far better ’twere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should ye yourselves destroy our goods and slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our herds, since, were it so, there might in time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be some requital. We, from street to street,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would plead continually for recompense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till all should be restored. But now ye heap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon me wrongs for which is no redress.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus angrily he spake, and clashed to earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sceptre, shedding tears. The people felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Compassion; all were silent for a space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there was none who dared with railing words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answer Telemachus, save one alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antinoüs, who arose and thus replied:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Telemachus, thou youth of braggart speech</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And boundless in abuse, what hast thou said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To our dishonor? Thou wouldst fix on us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A brand of shame. The blame is not with us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaian suitors; ’tis thy mother’s fault,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skilled as she is in crafty shifts. ’Tis now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already the third year, and soon will be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fourth, since she began to cozen us.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She gives us all to hope, and sends fair words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To each by message, yet in her own mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has other purposes. This shrewd device</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She planned; she laid upon the loom a web,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delicate, wide, and vast in length, and said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to us all: ‘Young princes, who are come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To woo me, since Ulysses is no more⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My noble husband⁠—urge me not, I pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To marriage, till I finish in the loom⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That so my threads may not be spun in vain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A funeral vesture for the hero-chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laertes, when his fatal hour shall come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With death’s long sleep. Else some Achaian dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might blame me, should I leave without a shroud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him who in life possessed such ample wealth!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such were her words, and easily they wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon our generous minds. So went she on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weaving that ample web, and every night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unravelled it by torchlight. Three full years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She practised thus, and by the fraud deceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Grecian youths; but when the hours had brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fourth year round, a woman who knew all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revealed the mystery, and we ourselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw her unravelling the ample web.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thenceforth, constrained, and with unwilling hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She finished it. Now let the suitors make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their answer to thy words, that thou mayst know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our purpose fully, and the Achaians all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May know it likewise. Send thy mother hence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Requiring that she wed the suitor whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her father chooses and herself prefers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if she still go on to treat the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greece with such despite, too confident</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In gifts which Pallas has bestowed on her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So richly, noble arts, and faculties</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mind, and crafty shifts, beyond all those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of whom we ever heard that lived of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bright-haired ladies of the Achaian race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tyro, Alcmena, and Mycenè, famed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For glossy tresses, none of them endowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As is Penelope, though this last shift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be ill devised⁠—so long will we consume</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy substance and estate as she shall hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her present mood, the purpose which the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have planted in her breast. She to herself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gains great renown, but surely brings on thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loss of much goods. And now we go not hence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To our affairs nor elsewhere, till she wed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whichever of the Greeks may please her most.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then rejoined discreet Telemachus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Antinoüs, grievous wrong it were to send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwilling from this palace her who bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nursed me. Whether he be living yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or dead, my father is in distant lands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And should I, of my own accord and will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dismiss my mother, I must make perforce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Icarius large amends, and that were hard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he would do me mischief, and the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would send yet other evils on my head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For then my mother, going forth, would call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the grim Furies, and the general curse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all men would be on me. Think not I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will ever speak that word. But if ye bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sense of injury for what is past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go from these halls; provide for other feasts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consuming what is yours, and visiting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each other’s homes in turn. But if it seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To you the wiser and the better way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To plunder one man’s goods, go on to waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My substance. I shall call the eternal gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To aid me, and, if Jupiter allow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fit retribution for your crimes, ye die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within this very palace unavenged.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake Telemachus. The Thunderer, Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent flying from a lofty mountain-top</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two eagles. First they floated on the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to each other, and with wings outspread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as they came to where the murmuring crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was gathered just beneath their flight, they turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clapped their heavy pinions, looking down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With deadly omen on the heads below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with their talons tore each other’s cheeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And necks, and then they darted to the right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away through Ithaca among its roofs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All who beheld the eagles were amazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wondered what event was near at hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the rest an aged hero spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Named Halitherses, Mastor’s son. He knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More truly than the others of his age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To augur from the flight of birds, and read</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The will of fate⁠—and wisely thus he spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear, men of Ithaca, what I shall say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I speak of what most narrowly concerns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitors, over whom already hangs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great peril, for Ulysses will not be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long at a distance from his home and friends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even now he is not far, and meditates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slaughter and death to all the suitor train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And evil will ensue to many more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of us, who dwell in sunny Ithaca.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now let us think what measures may restrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These men⁠—or let them of their own accord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Desist⁠—the soonest were for them the best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For not as one untaught do I foretell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Events to come, but speak of what I know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All things that I predicted to our chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What time the Argive troops embarked for Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sage Ulysses with them, are fulfilled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I said that after many hardships borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all his comrades lost, the twentieth year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would bring him back, a stranger to us all⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all that then I spake of comes to pass.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Eurymachus, the son of Polybus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered the seer: “Go to thy house, old man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to thy boys, and prophesy to them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest evil come upon them. I can act,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In matters such as these, a prophet’s part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better than thou. True, there are many birds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fly about in sunshine, but not all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are ominous. Ulysses far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has perished; well it would have been if thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hadst perished with him; then thou wouldst not prate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Idly of things to come, nor wouldst thou stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus to anger, in the hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bearing to thy house some gift from him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now let me say, and be assured my words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be fulfilled: experienced as thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou by treacherous speeches shalt inflame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A younger man than thou to violent deeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sharper punishment shall first be his,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we will lay on thee a penalty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old man, which thou shalt find it hard to bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bitterly wilt thou repent. And now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me persuade Telemachus to send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mother to her father. They will make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A marriage for her there, and give with her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A liberal dowry, such as may become</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A favorite daughter on her wedding-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Else never will the sons of Greece renounce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think, the difficult suit. We do not fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus himself, though glib of speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor care we for the empty oracle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which thou, old man, dost utter, making thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only more hated. Still will his estate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be wasted, nor will order e’er return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While she defers her marriage with some prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Achaians. We shall urge our suit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that most excellent of womankind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As rivals, nor withdraw to seek the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of others, whom we fitly might espouse.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To this discreet Telemachus replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Eurymachus, and ye, the illustrious train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of suitors, I have nothing more to ask⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more to say⁠—for now the gods and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaians know the truth. But let me have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gallant barque, and twenty men to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From coast to coast a voyage, visiting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sparta and sandy Pylos, to inquire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my long-absent father, and the chance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his return, if any of mankind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can tell me aught, or if some rumor come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Jove, since thus are tidings often brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To human knowledge. Should I learn that yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lives and may return, I then would wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A twelvemonth, though impatient. Should I hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he no longer lives, I shall return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Homeward, and pile his monument on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With funeral honors that become the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give my mother to a second spouse.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake and took his seat, and then arose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mentor, once comrade of the excellent chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, who, departing with his fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consigned his household to the aged man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they should all obey him, and that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should safely keep his charge. He rose amid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assembly, and addressed them wisely thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear and attend, ye men of Ithaca,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To what I say. Let never sceptred king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Henceforth be gracious, mild, and merciful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And righteous; rather be he deaf to prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prone to deeds of wrong, since no one now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembers the divine Ulysses more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the people over whom he ruled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Benignly like a father. Yet I bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No envy to the haughty suitors here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved as they are to deeds of violence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By evil counsels, since, in pillaging</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The substance of Ulysses, who they say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will nevermore return, they risk their lives.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I am angry with the rest, with all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of you who sit here mute, nor even with words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of stern reproof restrain their violence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though ye so many are and they so few.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Leiocritus, Evenor’s son, rejoined:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Malicious Mentor, foolish man! what talk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is this of holding us in check? ’Twere hard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For numbers even greater than our own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drive us from a feast. And should the prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ithaca, Ulysses, come himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking to thrust the illustrious suitors forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That banquet in these palace halls, his queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would have no cause for joy at his return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greatly as she desired it. He would draw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sure death upon himself in strife with us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who are so many. Thou hast spoken ill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now let the people who are gathered here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disperse to their employments. We will leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mentor and Halitherses, who were both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His father’s early comrades, to provide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the youth’s voyage. He will yet remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A long time here, I think, to ask for news</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Ithaca, and never will set sail.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having said, he instantly dismissed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people; they departed to their homes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitors sought the palace of the prince.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then to the ocean-side, apart from all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went forth Telemachus, and washed his hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the gray surf, and prayed to Pallas thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear me, thou deity who yesterday,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In visiting our palace, didst command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I should traverse the black deep to learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>News of my absent father, and the chance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his return! The Greeks themselves withstand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My purpose; the proud suitors most of all.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such was his prayer, and straightway Pallas stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In form and voice like Mentor, by his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus accosted him with winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Telemachus, thou henceforth shalt not lack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Valor or wisdom. If with thee abides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy father’s gallant spirit, as he was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In deed and word, thou wilt not vainly make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This voyage. But if thou be not in truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of him and of Penelope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then I rely not on thee to perform</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What thou dost meditate. Few sons are like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fathers: most are worse, a very few</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excel their parents. Since thou wilt not lack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Valor and wisdom in the coming time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor is thy father’s shrewdness wanting quite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thee, great hope there is that happily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This plan will be fulfilled. Regard not then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitor train, their purposes and plots.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Senseless are they, as little wise as just,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And have no thought of the black doom of death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now drawing near to sweep them in a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To their destruction. But thy enterprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must suffer no delay. So much am I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy father’s friend and thine, that I will cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A swift barque to be fitted out for sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will myself attend thee. Go now hence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the suitors, and make ready there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The needful stores, and let them all be put</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vessels⁠—wine in jars, and meal, the strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of man, in close thick skins⁠—while I engage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the people here, a willing crew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ships are there in our seagirt Ithaca</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many, new and old, and I will choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The best of these, and see it well equipped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then will we drag it down to the broad sea.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus Pallas spake, the child of Jupiter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus obeyed the heavenly voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stayed not; home he hastened, where he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sadly the arrogant suitors in the hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Busily flaying goats and roasting swine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antinoüs, laughing, came to meet the youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fastened on his hand, and thus he spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Telemachus, thou youth of lofty speech</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And boundless in abuse, let neither word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor deed that may displease thee vex thy heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But gayly eat and drink as thou wert wont.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaians generously will provide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever thou requirest, ship and men⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All chosen rowers⁠—that thou mayst arrive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sooner at sacred Pylos, there to learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tidings of thy illustrious father’s fate.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake discreet Telemachus in turn:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Antinoüs, never could I sit with you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrogant ones! in silence nor enjoy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The feast in quiet. Is it not enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O suitors, that while I was yet a child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye wasted on your revelries my large</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rich possessions? Now that I am grown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, when I hear the words of other men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Discern their meaning, now that every day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strengthens my spirit, I will make the attempt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring the evil fates upon your heads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether I go to Pylos or remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among this people. I shall surely make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This voyage, and it will not be in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although I go a passenger on board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another’s ship⁠—since neither ship have I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor rowers⁠—ye have judged that so were best.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and quickly from the suitor’s hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withdrew his own. The others who prepared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their banquet in the palace scoffed at him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flung at him their bitter taunts, and one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the insolent youths reviled him thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Telemachus is certainly resolved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To butcher us. He goes to bring allies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From sandy Pylos or the Spartan coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is so bent on slaughter. Or perhaps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He visits the rich land of Ephyrè</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In search of deadly poisons to be thrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a cup and end us all at once.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then said another of the haughty youths:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who knows but, wandering in his hollow barque,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He too may perish, far from all his friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as Ulysses perished? This would bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Increase of labor; it would cast on us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trouble to divide his goods, and give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His palace to his mother, and to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who takes the woman as his wedded wife.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake they, but Telemachus went down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To that high-vaulted room, his father’s, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay heaps of gold and brass, and garments store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In chests, and fragrant oils. And there stood casks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of delicate old wine and pure, a drink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For gods, in rows against the wall, to wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ever, after many hardships borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses should return. Upon that room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close-fitting double doors were shut, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was one who night and day kept diligent watch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A woman, Eurycleia, child of Ops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peisenor’s son. Telemachus went in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And called her to him, and bespake her thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nurse, let sweet wine be drawn into my jars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The finest next to that which thou dost keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expecting our unhappy lord, if yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobly born Ulysses shall escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The doom of death and come to us again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill twelve, and fit the covers close, and pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meal into well-sewn skins, and let the tale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be twenty measures of the flour of wheat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This none but thou must know. Let all these things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be brought together; then, as night shuts in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When to her upper chamber, seeking rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mother shall withdraw, I come and take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What thou providest for me. I am bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Sparta and for Pylos in the sands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gather news concerning the return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my dear father, if I haply may.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the youth, and his beloved nurse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sobbed, wept aloud, and spake these winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why should there come, dear child, a thought like this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into thy heart. Why wouldst thou wander forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To distant regions⁠—thou an only son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dearly loved? Ulysses, nobly born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has perished, from his native land afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Mid a strange race. These men, when thou art gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once will lay their plots to take thy life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And share thy wealth among them. Stay thou here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among thy people; need is none that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst suffer, roaming o’er the barren deep.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake discreet Telemachus again:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Be of good cheer, O nurse, for my design</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not without the sanction of a god;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But swear thou not to let my mother know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my intent until the eleventh day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or twelfth shall pass, or till, in missing me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She learn of my departure, lest she weep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stain with tears the beauty of her face.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the ancient woman solemnly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swore by the gods, and when the rite was o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew wine into the jars, and poured the meal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the well-sewn skins. Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entered the hall and joined the suitor train.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then did the blue-eyed goddess turn her thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To other plans, and taking on herself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The semblance of Telemachus, she ranged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city, speaking to each man in turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bidding him at nightfall to repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where the good ship lay. That gallant ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She begged of the renowned Noëmon, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phronius, who with cheerful grace complied.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sun went down, the city streets lay all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shadow. Then she drew the good ship down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the sea, and brought and put on board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The appointments every well-built galley needs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moored her at the bottom of the port,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, in a throng, obedient to the word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pallas, round her came her gallant crew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With yet a new device the blue-eyed maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went to the palace of the godlike chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, where she poured a gentle sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the suitors. As they drank she made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their senses wander, and their hands let fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goblets. Now no longer at the board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sat, but sallied forth, and through the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went to their slumbers, for the power of sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had fallen heavily upon their lids.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then blue-eyed Pallas from those sumptuous halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Summoned Telemachus. She took the form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And voice of Mentor, and bespake him thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Telemachus, already at their oars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sit thy well-armed companions and await</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy coming; let us go without delay.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having spoken, Pallas led the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With rapid footsteps which he followed fast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till having reached the galley and the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They found their long-haired comrades at the beach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus the gallant prince Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bespake them: “Hither, comrades, let us bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea-stores from the dwelling where they lie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mother knows not of it, nor her maids;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The secret has been told to one alone.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and went before them. In his steps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They followed. To the gallant barque they brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stores, and, as the well-beloved son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of King Ulysses bade, they laid them down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the hull. Telemachus went up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vessel’s side, but Pallas first embarked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at the stern sat down, while next to her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus was seated. Then the crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast loose the fastenings and went all on board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took their places on the rowers’ seats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While blue-eyed Pallas sent a favoring breeze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fresh wind from the west, that murmuring swept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dark-blue main. Telemachus gave forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The word to wield the tackle; they obeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And raised the fir-tree mast, and, fitting it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into its socket, bound it fast with cords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drew and spread with firmly twisted ropes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shining sails on high. The steady wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swelled out the canvas in the midst; the ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved on, the dark sea roaring round her keel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As swiftly through the waves she cleft her way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the rigging of that swift black ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was firmly in its place, they filled their cups</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wine, and to the ever-living gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured out libations, most of all to one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove’s blue-eyed daughter. Thus through all that night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the ensuing morn they held their way.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
