<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 10: Aeolus, the Lestrigonians, and Circè</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-10" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Aeolus, the Lestrigonians, and Circè</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Arrival of Ulysses at the land of Aeolus, who gives him the winds in a bag⁠—Folly of the seamen, who untie the bag while Ulysses is asleep⁠—A tempest⁠—Disastrous encounter with the gigantic laestrigons⁠—Arrival at the island of Circè⁠—Transformation of the Greeks to swine, and recovery of their former shape⁠—Preparations for a journey to the region of the dead.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>“We reached the Aeolian isle, where Aeolus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear to the gods, a son of Hippotas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made his abode. It was a floating isle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wall of brass enclosed it, and smooth rocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Edged it around. Twelve children in his halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were born, six daughters and six blooming sons;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave his daughters to his sons for wives.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they with their dear father and his queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Banquet from day to day, with endless change</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of meats before them. In his halls all day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sound of pipes is in the perfumed air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At night the youths beside their modest wives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleep on fair couches spread with tapestry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So coming to his town and fair abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I found a friendly welcome. One full month</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The monarch kept me with him, and inquired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all that might concern the fate of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Argive fleet, and the return to Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And just as it befell I told him all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when I spake to him of going thence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prayed him to dismiss me, he complied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And helped to make us ready for the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bladder of a bullock nine years old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave, in which he had compressed and bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stormy winds of air; for Saturn’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had given him empire o’er the winds, with power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To calm them or to rouse them at his will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This in our roomy galley he made fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a bright chain of silver, that no breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ruder air might blow. He only left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The west wind free to waft our ships and us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon our way. But that was not to be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We perished by a folly of our own.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nine days we held our way, both day and night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now appeared in sight our native fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the tenth night, where on the shore we saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men kindling fires. Meantime a pleasant sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had overcome my weary limbs, for long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had I been guiding with incessant toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rudder, nor would trust it to the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of any other, such was my desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To reach our country by the shortest way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then talked my crew among themselves, and said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I had brought with me from Aeolus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The large-souled son of Hippotas, rich gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold and silver. Standing side by side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looking at each other, thus they said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘How wonderfully is our chief revered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loved by all men, wander where he will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into what realm soever! From the coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy he sailed with many precious things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His share of spoil, while we, who with him went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with him came, are empty-handed yet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now hath Aeolus, to show how much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He prizes him, bestowed the treasures here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, let us see them; let us know how much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold and silver is concealed in this.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus speaking to each other, they obeyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The evil counsel. They untied the sack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straight the winds rushed forth and seized the ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swept the crews, lamenting bitterly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from their country out upon the deep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then I woke, and in my noble mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bethought me whether I should drop at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the deep and perish, or remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And silently endure and keep my place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the living. I remained, endured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And covered with my mantle lay within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My galley, while the furious whirlwind bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to the Aeolian isle our groaning crews.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“We landed on the coast, and to our barques</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought water. Then my men prepared a meal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the fleet; and having tasted food</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wine, I took a herald and a friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, hastening to the sumptuous palace-halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aeolus, I found him with his wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And children banqueting. We sat us down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the threshold at the palace-doors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they were all astonished, and inquired:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Why art thou here? What god thine enemy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursues thee, O Ulysses! whom we sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So well prepared to reach thy native land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy home, or any place that pleased thee most?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“They spake, and sorrowfully I replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘The fault is all with my unthinking crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my own luckless slumber. Yet, my friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repair the mischief, for ye have the power.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus with submissive words I spake, but they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat mute, the father only answered me:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Hence with thee! Leave our island instantly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vilest of living men! It may not be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I receive or aid as he departs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One who is hated by the blessed gods⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou art hated by the gods. Away!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake, and sent us from the palace-door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lamenting. Sorrowfully went we on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now with rowing hard and long⁠—the fruit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our own folly⁠—all our crews lost heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every hope of safe return was gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Six days and nights we sailed; the seventh we came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lofty Laestrigoni with wide gates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city of Lamos, where, on going forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherd calls to shepherd entering in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There might a man who never yields to sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earn double wages, first in pasturing herds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then in tending sheep; for there the fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grazed in the daytime are by others grazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At night. We reached its noble haven, girt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By towering rocks that rise on every side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the bold shores run out to form its mouth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A narrow entrance. There the other crews</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stationed their barques, and moored them close beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each other, in that hill-encircled port.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No billow, even the smallest, rises there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The water glimmers with perpetual calm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I only kept my dark-hulled ship without,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bound its cable to a jutting rock.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I climbed a rugged headland, and looked forth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No marks of tilth appeared, the work of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or oxen, only smokes that from below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose in the air. And then I sent forth scouts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To learn what race of men who live by bread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inhabited the land. Two chosen men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sent, a herald made the third; and these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went inland by a level path, on which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wains brought fuel from the woody heights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the city. On their way they met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the town, a damsel with an ewer⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stately daughter of Antiphates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Laestrigonian, who was coming down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where Artacia’s smoothly flowing fount</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave water for the city. They drew near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spake, and asked her who was sovereign there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who his people. Straight she pointed out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lofty pile in which her father dwelt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They entered that proud palace, and beheld,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tall as a mountain peak, the monarch’s wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shuddered at the sight. With eager haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She called her husband, King Antiphates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From council. With a murderous intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came, and, seizing one of my poor friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devoured him, while the other two betook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Themselves to sudden flight and reached the ships.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then he raised a fearful yell that rang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all the city. The strong Laestrigons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed forth by thousands from all sides, more like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To giants than to common men. They hurled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stones of enormous weight from cliffs above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cries of those who perished and the crash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shattered galleys rose. They speared our friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like fishes for their horrid feasts, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore them away. While those within the port</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were slaughtered, drawing my good sword I cut</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hawsers fastened to my ship’s blue prow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cheered my men, and bade them fling themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the oars, that so we might escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our threatened fate. They heard, and plied their oars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like men who rowed for life. The galley shot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth from these beetling rocks into the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full gladly; all the others perished there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Onward we sailed, with sorrow in our hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For our lost friends, though glad to be reprieved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From death. And now we landed at an isle⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeaea, where the fair-haired Circè dwelt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A goddess high in rank and skilled in song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Own sister of the wise Aeaetes. Both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were children of the source of light, the Sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Persè, Ocean’s daughter, brought them forth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We found a haven here, where ships might lie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And guided by some deity we brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our galley silently against the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And disembarked, and gave two days and nights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rest, unmanned with hardship and with grief.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When bright-haired Morning brought the third day round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I took my spear and my good sword, and left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ship, and climbed a height, in hope to spy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some trace of human toil, or hear some voice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a steep precipice I stood, and saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the broad earth below a rising smoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where midst the thickets and the forest-ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood Circè’s palace. Seeing that dark smoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thought arose within my mind that there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should inquire. I pondered till at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This seemed the wisest⁠—to return at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my good ship upon the ocean-side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give my crew their meal, and send them forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To view the region. Coming to the spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where lay my well-oared barque, some pitying god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath whose eye I wandered forth alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent a huge stag into my very path,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High-horned, which from his pasture in the wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descended to the riverside to drink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For grievously he felt the hot sun’s power.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him as he ran I smote; the weapon pierced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just at the spine, the middle of his back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brazen blade passed through, and with a moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell amid the dust, and yielded up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His life. I went to him, and set my foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against him, and plucked forth the brazen spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left it leaning there. And then I broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lithe osiers from the shrubs, and twined of these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rope, which, doubled, was an ell in length.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With that I tied the enormous creature’s feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slung him on my neck, and brought him thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my black ship. I used the spear to prop</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My steps, since he no longer could be borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the shoulder, aided by the hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such was the animal’s bulk. I flung him down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the ship, encouraging my men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With cheerful words, and thus I said to each:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘My friends, we will not, wretched as we are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go down to Pluto’s realm before our time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While food and wine are yet within the hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our good galley, let us not forget</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our daily meals, and famine-stricken pine.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake; they all obeyed, and at my word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came forth, and standing by the barren deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Admired the stag, for he was huge of bulk;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when their eyes were tired with wondering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My people washed their hands, and soon had made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A noble banquet ready. All that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till set of sun we sat and feasted there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the abundant meat and delicate wine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the sun went down, and darkness came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We slept upon the shore. But when the Morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rosy-fingered child of Dawn, looked forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I called a council of my men and spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Give ear, my friends, amid your sufferings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To words that I shall say. We cannot here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know which way lies the west, nor where the east,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor where the sun, that shines for all mankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descends below the earth, nor where again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rises from it. Yet will we consult,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If room there be for counsel⁠—which I doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when I climbed that height I overlooked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An isle surrounded by the boundless deep⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An isle low lying. In the midst I saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoke rising from a thicket of the wood.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake; their courage died within their hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they remembered what Antiphates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Laestrigon, had done, and what foul deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cannibal Cyclops, and they wept aloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tears flowed abundantly, but tears were now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of no avail to our unhappy band.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Numbering my well-armed men, I made of them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two equal parties, giving each its chief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself commanded one; Eurylochus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero, took the other in his charge.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then in a brazen helm we shook the lots;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lot of brave Eurylochus leaped forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he with two-and-twenty of our men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went forward with quick steps, and yet in tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While we as sorrowful were left behind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“They found the fair abode where Circè dwelt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A palace of hewn stone within the vale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet nobly seated. There were mountain wolves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lions round it, which herself had tamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With powerful drugs; yet these assaulted not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The visitors, but, wagging their long tails,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood on their hinder feet, and fawned on them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like mastiffs on their master when he comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From banqueting and brings them food. So fawned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strong-clawed wolves and lions on my men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fear my men beheld those beasts of prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet went, and, standing in the portico</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the bright-haired divinity, they heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her sweet voice singing, as within she threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shuttle through the wide immortal web,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as is woven by the goddesses⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delicate, bright of hue, and beautiful.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Polites then, a chief the most beloved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And most discreet of all my comrades, spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Someone is here, my friends, who sweetly sings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weaving an ample web, and all the floor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rings to her voice. Whoever she may be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woman or goddess, let us call to her.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake; aloud they called, and forth she came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And threw at once the shining doors apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade my comrades enter. Without thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They followed her. Eurylochus alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remained without, for he suspected guile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She led them in and seated them on thrones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then mingling for them Pramnian wine with cheese,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meal, and fresh honey, and infusing drugs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the mixture⁠—drugs which made them lose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The memory of their home⁠—she handed them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beverage and they drank. Then instantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She touched them with a wand, and shut them up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sties, transformed to swine in head and voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bristles and shape, though still the human mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remained to them. Thus sorrowing they were driven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into their cells, where Circè flung to them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Acorns of oak and ilex, and the fruit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of cornel, such as nourish wallowing swine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Back came Eurylochus to our good ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With news of our poor comrades and their fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He strove to speak, but could not; he was stunned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By that calamity; his eyes were filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tears, and his whole soul was given to grief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We marvelled greatly; long we questioned him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus he spake of our lost friends at last:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Through yonder thickets, as thou gav’st command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illustrious chief! we went, until we reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stately palace of hewn stones, within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vale, yet nobly seated. Someone there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goddess or woman, weaving busily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An ample web, sang sweetly as she wrought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My comrades called aloud, and forth she came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And threw at once the shining doors apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade us enter. Without thought the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed, while I alone, suspecting guile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remained without. My comrades, from that hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were seen no more; not one of them again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came forth, though long I sat and watched for them.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake; I slung my silver-studded sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon my shoulders⁠—a huge blade of brass⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my bow with it, and commanded him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lead the way. He seized and clasped my knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With both his hands in attitude of prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sorrowfully said these winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Take me not thither; force me not to go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O foster-child of Jove! but leave me here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou wilt not return, I know, nor yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deliver one of our lost friends. Our part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is to betake ourselves to instant flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With these who yet remain, and so escape.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake, and I replied: ‘Eurylochus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remain thou here, beside our roomy ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eating and drinking. I shall surely go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A strong necessity is laid on me.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake, and from the ship and shore went up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the isle; and when I found myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within that awful valley, and not far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the great palace in which Circè dwelt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sorceress, there met me on my way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A youth; he seemed in manhood’s earJy prime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When youth has most of grace. He took my hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And held it, and, accosting me, began:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Rash mortal! whither art thou wandering thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone among the hills, where every place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is strange to thee? Thy comrades are shut up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Circè’s palace in close cells like swine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Com’st thou to set them free? Nay, thou like them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt rather find thyself constrained to stay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me bestow the means to make thee safe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against that mischief. Take this potent herb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear it with thee to the palace-halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Circè, and it shall avert from thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The threatened evil. I will now reveal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The treacherous arts of Circè. She will bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mingled draught to thee, and drug the bowl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But will not harm thee thus; the virtuous plant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I gave thee will prevent it. Hear yet more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When she shall smite thee with her wand, draw forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy good sword from thy thigh and rush at her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if to take her life, and she will crouch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fear, and will solicit thine embrace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refuse her not, that so she may release</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy comrades, and may send thee also back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thine own land; but first exact of her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The solemn oath which binds the blessed gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she will meditate no other harm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee, nor strip thee of thy manly strength.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The Argus-queller spake, and plucked from earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The potent plant and handed it to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And taught me all its powers. The root is black,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blossom white as milk. Among the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its name is Moly; hard it is for men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dig it up; the gods find nothing hard.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Back through the woody island Hermes went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward high Olympus, while I took my way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Circè’s halls, yet with a beating heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, as I stood beneath the portico</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that bright-haired divinity, I called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aloud; the goddess heard my voice and came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And threw at once the shining doors apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prayed me to come in. I followed her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet grieving still. She led me in and gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A seat upon a silver-studded throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful, nobly wrought, and placed beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A footstool, and prepared a mingled draught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within a golden chalice, and infused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A drug with mischievous intent. She gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cup; I drank it off; the charm wrought not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then she smote me with her wand and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Go to the sty, and with thy fellows sprawl.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She spake; but drawing forth the trusty sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon my thigh, I rushed at her as if</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take her life. She shrieked and, stooping low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran underneath my arm and clasped my knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And uttered piteously these winged words:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ‘Who art thou? of what race and of what land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who thy parents? I am wonder-struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see that thou couldst drink that magic juice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yield not to its power. No living man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whoever he might be, that tasted once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those drugs, or passed them o’er his lips, has yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withstood them. In thy breast a spirit dwells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to be thus subdued. Art thou not then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, master of wise stratagems,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose coming hither, on his way from Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his black galley, oft has been foretold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Hermes of the golden wand? But sheathe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy sword and share my couch, that, joined in love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each may hereafter trust the other’s faith.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She spake, and I replied: ‘How canst thou ask,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Circè, that I gently deal with thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thou, in thine own palace, hast transformed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My friends to swine, and plottest even now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep me with thee, luring me to pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into thy chamber and to share thy couch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou mayst strip me of my manly strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I come not to thy couch till thou engage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O goddess, by a solemn oath, that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt never seek to do me further harm.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake; she straightway took the oath required,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, after it was uttered and confirmed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to her sumptuous couch I went. Meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four diligent maidens ministered within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace⁠—servants of the household they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who had their birth from fountains and from groves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sacred rivers flowing to the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One spread the thrones with gorgeous coverings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above was purple arras, and beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were linen webs; another, setting forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silver tables just before the thrones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Placed on them canisters of gold; a third</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mingled the rich wines in a silver bowl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And placed the golden cups; and, last, the fourth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought water from the fountain, and beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A massive tripod kindled a great fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And warmed the water. When it boiled within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shining brass, she led me to the bath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And washed me from the tripod. On my head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shoulders pleasantly she shed the streams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That from my members took away the sense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of weariness, unmanning body and mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when she thus had bathed me and with oil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anointed me, she put a princely cloak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tunic on me, led me in, and showed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My seat⁠—a stately silver-studded throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High-wrought⁠—and placed a footstool for my feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then came a handmaid with a golden ewer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from it poured pure water for my hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a silver laver. Next she placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A polished table near to me, on which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The matron of the palace laid the feast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many delicacies from her store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade me eat. The banquet pleased me not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My thoughts were elsewhere; dark imaginings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were in my mind. When Circè marked my mood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in a gloomy revery I sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And put not forth my hands to touch the feast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She came to me and spake these winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Why sittest thou like one who has no power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of speech, Ulysses, wrapt in thoughts that gnaw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy heart, and tasting neither food nor wine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still dost thou dream of fraud? It is not well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou shouldst fear it longer, since I pledged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself against it with a mighty oath.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She spake, and I replied: ‘What man whose heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is faithful could endure to taste of food</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wine till he should see his captive friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more at large? If with a kind intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou bidst me eat and drink, let me behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With mine own eyes my dear companions free.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake; and Circè took her wand and went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth from her halls, and, opening the gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That closed the sty, drove forth what seemed a herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of swine in their ninth year. They ranged themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before her, and she went from each to each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shed on them another drug. Forthwith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell from their limbs the bristles which had grown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All over them, when mighty Circè gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At first the baleful potion. Now again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My friends were men, and younger than before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of a nobler mien and statelier growth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They knew me all; and each one pressed my hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his, and there were tears and sobs of joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sounded through the palace. Circè too</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was moved, the mighty goddess; she drew near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stood by me, and spake these winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Son of Laertes, nobly born and wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses! go to thy good ship beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea and draw it up the beach, and hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goods and weapons in the caverns there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And come thou back and bring with thee thy friends.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She spake, and easily my generous mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was moved by what she said. Forthwith I went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my good ship beside the sea, and found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My friends in tears, lamenting bitterly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in some grange the calves come leaping round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A herd of kine returning to the stall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From grassy fields where they have grazed their fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor can the stall contain the young which spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around their mothers with continual bleat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So when my comrades saw me through their tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sprang to meet me, and their joy was such</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if they were in their own native land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their own city, on the rugged coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ithaca, where they were born and reared;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as they wept they spake these winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘O foster-child of Jove! we welcome thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thy return with a delight as great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if we all had reached again the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gave us birth, our Ithaca. And now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell by what death our other friends have died.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“They spake; I answered with consoling words:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘First draw our galley up the beach, and hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our goods and all our weapons in the caves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then let all make haste to follow me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see our friends in Circè’s sacred halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eating and drinking at the plenteous board.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake; and cheerfully my men obeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save that Eurylochus alone essayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hold them back, and spake these winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Ah, whither are we going, wretched ones?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are ye so eager for an evil fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ye must go where Circè dwells, who waits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To turn us into lions, swine, or wolves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forced to remain and guard her spacious house?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So was it with the Cyclops, when our friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went with this daring chief to his abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And perished there through his foolhardiness.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake; and then I thought to draw my sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my stout thigh, and with the trenchant blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike off his head and let it fall to earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though he were my near kinsman; yet the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restrained me, each one speaking kindly words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Nay, foster-child of Jove! if thou consent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This man shall stay behind and with the ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he shall guard the ship, but lead us thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where the sacred halls of Circè stand.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“They spake, and from the ship and shore went up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the land, nor was Eurylochus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left with the ship; he followed, for he feared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My terrible threat. Meantime had Circè bathed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My comrades at the palace, and with oil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anointed them, and robed them in fair cloaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tunics. There we found them banqueting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they and those who came with me beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each other, and the memory of the past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came back to them, they wept abundantly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the palace echoed with their sobs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the mighty goddess came and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Son of Laertes, nobly born and wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prolong thou not these sorrows. Well I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What ye have suffered on the fishy deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the evil that malignant men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have done to you on land. Now take the food</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before you, drink the wine, till ye receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into your hearts the courage that was yours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When long ago ye left your fatherland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rugged Ithaca. Ye are unnerved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spiritless with thinking constantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On your long wanderings, and your minds allow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No space for mirth, for ye have suffered much.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She spake; her words persuaded easily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our generous minds, and there from day to day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We lingered a full year, and banqueted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobly on plenteous meats and delicate wines.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the year was ended, and the hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renewed their circle, my beloved friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Circè’s palace called me forth and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Good chief, do not forget thy native land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If fate indeed permit that ever thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return in safety to that lofty pile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy palace in the country of thy birth.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So spake they, and my generous mind was moved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that day long until the set of sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We sat and feasted on the abundant meats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And delicate wines; and when the sun went down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They took their rest within the darkened halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I to Circè’s sumptuous couch went up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A suppliant at her knees. The goddess heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My prayer, as thus in winged words I said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘O Circè! make, I pray, the promise good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which thou hast given, to send me to my home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart is pining for it, and the hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all my friends, who weary out my life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lamenting round me when thou art not nigh.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake; the mighty goddess thus replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Son of Laertes, nobly born and wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses! ye must not remain with me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwillingly; but ye have yet to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another voyage, and must visit first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The abode of Pluto, and of Proserpine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His dreaded queen, and there consult the soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the blind seer Tiresias⁠—him of Thebes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose intellect was spared; for Proserpine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave back to him in death the power of mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That only he might know of things to come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rest are shades that flit from place to place.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus spake the goddess; and my heart was wrung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sorrow, and I sat upon the couch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wept, nor could I longer wish to live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see the light of day. But when my grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With shedding tears and tossing where I sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was somewhat spent, I spake to Circè thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘O Circè, who will guide me when I make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This voyage? for no galley built by man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has ever yet arrived at Pluto’s realm.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake; the mighty goddess answered me:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Son of Laertes, nobly born and wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take thou no thought of who shall guide thy barque,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But raise the mast and spread the glimmering sail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seat thyself, and let the north-wind waft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy galley on. As soon as thou shalt cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Océanus, and come to the low shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And groves of Proserpine, the lofty groups</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of poplars, and the willows that let fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their withered fruit, moor thou thy galley there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the deep eddies of Océanus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pass to Pluto’s comfortless abode.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There into Acheron are poured the streams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pyriphlegethon, and of that arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Styx, Cocytus. At the place where meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ever-roaring waters stands a rock;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw near to that, and there I bid thee scoop</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In earth a trench, a cubit long and wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round about it pour to all the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Libations⁠—milk and honey first, and next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rich wine, and lastly water, scattering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White meal upon them. Offer there thy prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fervently to that troop of airy forms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make the vow that thou wilt sacrifice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou at last shalt come to Ithaca,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heifer without blemish, barren yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thine own courts, and heap the altar-pyre</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With things of price; and to the seer alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tiresias, by himself, a ram whose fleece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is wholly black, the best of all thy flocks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after thou hast duly offered prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the illustrious nations of the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then sacrifice a ram and a black ewe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their faces turned toward Erebus, but thine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other way and toward the river streams.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither the souls of those who died will flock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In multitudes. Then call thy friends, and give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Command to flay in haste the sheep that lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain by the cruel brass, and, burning there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The carcasses, pay worship to the gods⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The powerful Pluto and dread Proserpine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw then the sword upon thy thigh, and sit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And suffer none of all those airy forms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To touch the blood until thou first bespeak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tiresias. He will come, and speedily⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The leader of the people⁠—and will tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What voyage thou must make, what length of way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou yet must measure, and will show thee how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou mayst return across the fishy deep.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She spake; and while she spake the Morn looked forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon her golden throne. The Nymph bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On me a cloak and tunic, and arrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herself in a white robe with ample folds⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A delicate web and graceful. Round her loins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She clasped a shining zone of gold, and hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A veil upon her forehead. Forth I went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throughout the palace and aroused my friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus I said in cheerful tones to each:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘No longer give yourselves to idle rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pleasant slumber; we are to depart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gracious Circè counsels us to go.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake, and easily their generous minds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inclined to me. Yet brought I not away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All my companions safely from the isle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Elpenor was the youngest of our band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not brave in war was he, nor wise in thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, overcome with wine, and for the sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of coolness, had lain down to sleep, apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all the rest, in Circè’s sacred house;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as my friends bestirred themselves, the noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tumult roused him; he forgot to come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the long staircase; headlong from the roof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He plunged; his neck was broken at the spine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his soul went to the abode of death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My friends came round me, and I said to them:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haply your thought may be that you are bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the dear country of your birth; but know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Circè sends us elsewhere, to consult</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Theban seer, Tiresias, in the abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pluto and the dreaded Proserpine.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake, and their hearts failed them as they heard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sat them down, and wept, and tore their hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But fruitless were their sorrow and their tears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus as we sadly moved to our good ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the seashore, weeping all the while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Circè, meantime, had visited its deck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there had bound a ram and a black ewe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By means we saw not; for what eye discerns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The presence of a deity, who moves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From place to place, and wills not to be seen?”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
