<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book XI: Visit of Ulysses to the Land of the Dead</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-11" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Visit of Ulysses to the Land of the Dead</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Voyage to the land of the dead⁠—Interview with Tiresias, the seer⁠—The heroes and heroines whom Ulysses saw there⁠—Interview with his mother, and with Agamemnon, Achilles, and others⁠—Occupations of the dead⁠—Punishments of the guilty.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>“Now, when we reached our galley by the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We drew it first into the mighty deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And set the mast and sails, and led on board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sheep, and sorrowfully and in tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embarked ourselves. The fair-haired and august</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Circè, expert in music, sent with us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A kindly fellow-voyager⁠—a wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That breathed behind the dark-prowed barque, and swelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sails; and now, with all things in their place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throughout the ship, we sat us down⁠—the breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And helmsman guiding us upon our way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All day our sails were stretched, as o’er the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our vessel ran; the sun went down; the paths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the great sea were darkened, and our barque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reached the far confines of Océanus.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There lies the land, and there the people dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Cimmerians, in eternal cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And darkness. Never does the glorious sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look on them with his rays, when he goes up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the starry sky, nor when again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sinks from heaven to earth. Unwholesome night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erhangs the wretched race. We touched the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, drawing up our galley on the beach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took from on board the sheep, and followed on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the ocean-stream until we reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The place of which the goddess Circè spake.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Here Perimedes and Eurylochus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held in their grasp the victims, while I drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trusty sword upon my thigh, and scooped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A trench in earth, a cubit long and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round which we stood, and poured to all the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Libations⁠—milk and honey first, and next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rich wine, and lastly water, scattering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White meal upon them. Then I offered prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fervently to that troop of airy forms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made a vow that I would sacrifice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I at last should come to Ithaca,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heifer without blemish, barren yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my own courts, and heap the altar-pyre</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With things of price, and to the seer alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tiresias, by himself, a ram whose fleece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was wholly black, the best of all my flocks.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When I had worshipped thus with prayer and vows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nations of the dead, I took the sheep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pierced their throats above the hollow trench.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blood flowed dark; and thronging round me came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Souls of the dead from Erebus⁠—young wives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And maids unwedded, men worn out with years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And toil, and virgins of a tender age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their new grief, and many a warrior slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle, mangled by the spear, and clad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In bloody armor, who about the trench</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flitted on every side, now here, now there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gibbering cries, and I grew pale with fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then calling to my friends, I bade them flay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victims lying slaughtered by the knife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, burning them with fire, invoke the gods⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty Pluto and dread Proserpine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then from my thigh I drew the trusty sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sat me down, and suffered none of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those airy phantoms to approach the blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until I should bespeak the Theban seer.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And first the soul of my companion came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Elpenor, for he was not buried yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In earth’s broad bosom. We had left him dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Circè’s halls, unwept and unentombed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We had another task. But when I now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld I pitied him, and, shedding tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I said these winged words: ‘How earnest thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Elpenor, hither into these abodes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of night and darkness? Thou hast made more speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although on foot, than I in my good ship.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake; the phantom sobbed and answered me:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Son of Laertes, nobly born and wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses! ’twas the evil doom decreed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By some divinity, and too much wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wrought my death. I laid myself to sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Circè’s palace, and, remembering not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The way to the long stairs that led below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell from the roof, and by the fall my neck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was broken at the spine; my soul went down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hades. I conjure thee now, by those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom thou hast left behind and far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy consort and thy father⁠—him by whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou when a boy wert reared⁠—and by thy son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus, who in thy palace-halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is left alone⁠—for well I know that thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In going hence from Pluto’s realm, wilt moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy gallant vessel in the Aeaean isle⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That there, O king, thou wilt remember me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave me not when thou departest thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwept, unburied, lest I bring on thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The anger of the gods. But burn me there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all the armor that I wore, and pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to the hoary deep, a mound for me⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hapless man of whom posterity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall hear. Do this for me, and plant upright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon my tomb the oar with which I rowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet a living man, among thy friends.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake and I replied: ‘Unhappy youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this I duly will perform for thee.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And then the soul of Anticleia came⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My own dead mother, daughter of the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Autolycus, large-minded. Her I left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alive, what time I sailed for Troy, and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wept to see her there, and pitied her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet forbade her, though with grief, to come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near to the blood till I should first accost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tiresias. He too came, the Theban seer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tiresias, bearing in his hand a wand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold; he knew me and bespake me thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Why, O unhappy mortal, hast thou left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light of day to come among the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to this joyless land? Go from the trench</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turn thy sword away, that I may drink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blood, and speak the word of prophecy.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake; withdrawing from the trench, I thrust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into its sheath my silver-studded sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after drinking of the dark red blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blameless prophet turned to me and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Illustrious chief Ulysses, thy desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is for a happy passage to thy home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet will a god withstand thee. Not unmarked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Neptune shalt thou, as I deem, proceed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon thy voyage. He hath laid up wrath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against thee in his heart, for that thy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deprived his son of sight. Yet may ye still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return, though after many hardships borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou but hold thy appetite in check,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that of thy companions, when thou bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy gallant barque to the Trinacrian isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe from the gloomy deep. There will ye find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beeves and fading wethers of the Sun⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The all-beholding and all-hearing Sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If these ye leave unharmed, and keep in mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thought of your return, ye may go back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though sufferers, to your home in Ithaca;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if thou do them harm, the event will be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Destruction to thy ship and to its crew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou, if thou escape it, wilt return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Late to thy country, all thy comrades lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a foreign barque, and thou shalt find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrong in thy household⁠—arrogant men who waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy substance, wooers of thy noble wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And offering bridal gifts. On thy return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt avenge thee of their violent deeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when thou shalt have slain them in thy halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether by stratagem or by the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In open fight, then take a shapely oar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And journey on, until thou meet with men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who have not known the sea nor eaten food</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seasoned with salt, nor ever have beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Galleys with crimson prows, nor shapely oars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which are the wings of ships. I will declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sign by which to know them, nor canst thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mistake it. When a traveller, meeting thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shalt say that thou dost bear a winnowing-fan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon thy sturdy shoulder, stop and plant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy shapely oar upright in earth, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pay to King Neptune solemn sacrifice⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ram, a bull, and from his herd of swine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A boar. And then returning to thy home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See that thou offer hallowed hecatombs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the ever-living ones who dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the broad heaven, to each in order due.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So at the last thy death shall come to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from the sea, and gently take thee off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a serene old age that ends among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A happy people. I have told thee true.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake, and thus I answered him: ‘The gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tiresias, have decreed as thou hast said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But tell, and tell me truly⁠—I behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soul of my dead mother; there she sits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In silence by the blood, and will not deign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To look upon her son nor speak to him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instruct me, mighty prophet, by what means</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make my mother know me for her son.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake, and instantly the seer replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Easily that is told; I give it thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear in mind. Whoever of the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou sufferest to approach and drink the blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will speak the truth; those whom thou dost forbid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To taste the blood will silently withdraw.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The soul of King Tiresias, saying this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed to the abode of Pluto; he had given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The oracle I asked. I waited still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until my mother, drawing near again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drank the dark blood; she knew me suddenly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said in piteous tones these winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘How didst thou come, my child, a living man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into this place of darkness? Difficult</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is for those who breathe the breath of life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To visit these abodes, through which are rolled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great rivers, fearful floods⁠—the first of these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Océanus, whose waters none can cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On foot, or save on board a trusty barque.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou come hither on thy way from Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A weary wanderer with thy ship and friends?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hast thou not been yet at Ithaca,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor in thine island palace seen thy wife?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She spake, I answered: ‘ ’Tis necessity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear mother, that has brought me to the abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pluto, to consult the Theban seer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tiresias. Not to the Achaian coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have I returned, nor reached our country, yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Continually I wander; everywhere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I meet misfortune⁠—even from the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, in the noble Agamemnon’s train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I came to Ilium, famed for steeds, and made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War on its dwellers. Tell me now, I pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And truly, how it was that fate on thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought the long sleep of death? by slow disease?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, stealing on thee, did the archer-queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diana, slay thee with her silent shafts?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tell me of my father, and the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left in my palace. Rests the sway I bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On them, or has another taken it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since men believe I shall return no more?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tell me of my wedded wife, her thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And purposes, and whether she remains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet with my son. Is she the guardian still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my estates, or has the noblest chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those Achaians led her thence a bride?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake; my reverend mother answered thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Most certain is it that she sadly dwells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still in thy palace. Weary days and nights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tears are hers. No man has taken yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy place as ruler, but Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still has the charge of thy domain, and gives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The liberal feasts which it befits a prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give, for all invite him. In the fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy father dwells, and never in the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is seen; nor beds nor cloaks has he, nor mats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rich device, but, all the winter through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sleeps where sleep the laborers, on the hearth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the dust, and wears a wretched garb;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the summer comes, or autumn days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ripen the fruit, his bed is on the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made of leaves, that everywhere are shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the rich vineyards. There he lies and grieves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, cherishing his sorrow, mourns thy fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And keenly feels the miseries of age.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus I underwent my fate and died;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For not the goddess of the unerring bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stealing upon me smote me in thy halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With silent arrows, nor did slow disease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come o’er me, such as, wasting cruelly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The members, takes at last the life away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But constant longing for thee, anxious thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thee, and memory of thy gentleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, made an end of my sweet life.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She spake; I longed to take into my arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soul of my dead mother. Thrice I tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved by a strong desire, and thrice the form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed through them like a shadow or a dream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then did the great sorrow in my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grow sharper, and in winged words I said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Beloved mother, why wilt thou not keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy place, that I may clasp thee, so that here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Pluto’s realm and in each other’s arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We each might in the other soothe the sense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of misery? Hath mighty Proserpine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent but an empty shade to meet me here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I might only grieve and sigh the more?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake, and then my reverend mother said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Believe not that Jove’s daughter Proserpine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deceives thee. ’Tis the lot of all our race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they are dead. No more the sinews bind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bones and flesh, when once from the white bones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The life departs. Then like a dream the soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flies off, and flits about from place to place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But haste thou to the light again, and mark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I have said, that thou in after days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mayst tell it to thy wife on thy return.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus we conferred. Meantime the women came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around me, moved by mighty Proserpine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In throngs they gathered to the dark red blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, as I pondered how to question each,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This seemed the wisest⁠—from my sturdy thigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I plucked the trenchant sword, and suffered not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that were there to taste the blood at once;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So one by one they came, and each in turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Declared her lineage. Thus I questioned all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then saw I highborn Tyro first, who claimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be the daughter of that blameless man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Salmoneus, and who called herself the wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Cretheus, son of Aeolus. She loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enipeus, hallowed river, fairest stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all that flow on earth, and often walked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside its pleasant waters. He whose arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surround the islands, Neptune, once put on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The river’s form, and at its gulfy mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met her; the purple waters stood upright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around them like a wall, and formed an arch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hid the god and woman. There he loosed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The virgin zone of Tyro, shedding sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon her. Afterward he took her hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said: ‘Rejoice, O maiden, in our love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For with the year’s return shalt thou bring forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illustrious sons; the embraces of the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are not unfruitful. Rear them carefully.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now return to thy abode, and watch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy words, and keep thy secret. Thou must know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I am Neptune, he who shakes the earth.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake, and plunged into the billowy deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she became a mother, and brought forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelias and Neleus, valiant ministers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mighty Jupiter. On the broad lands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Iäolchos Pelias dwelt, and reared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vast flocks of sheep, while Neleus made his home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Pylos midst the sands. The queenly dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mother, meanwhile brought forth other sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Cretheus⁠—Aeson first, and Pheres next,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Amythaon, great in horsemanship.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And after her I saw Antiopè,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daughter of Asopus⁠—her who made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A boast that she had slumbered in the arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jove. Two sons she bore⁠—Amphion one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other Zethus⁠—and they founded Thebes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its seven gates, and girt it round with towers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, valiant as they were, they could not dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safely in that great town unfenced by towers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And after her I saw Amphitryon’s wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcmena, her who brought forth Hercules,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dauntless hero of the lion-heart⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For she had given herself into the arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mighty Jupiter. I also saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Megara there, a daughter of the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of haughty Creion. Her Amphitryon’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unamable in strength, had made his wife.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The mother, too, of Oedipus I saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful Epicastè, who in life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had done unwittingly a heinous deed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had married her own son, who, having slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her father first, espoused her; but the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Published abroad the rumor of the crime.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He in the pleasant town of Thebes bore sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the Cadmeians; yet in misery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lived, for so the offended gods ordained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she went down to Hades and the gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That stand forever barred; for, wild with grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She slung a cord upon a lofty beam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And perished by it, leaving him to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woes without measure, such as on a son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The furies of a mother might inflict.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And there I saw the dame supremely fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chloris, whom Neleus with large marriage-gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wooed, and brought home a bride; the youngest she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the daughters of Iäsus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amphion, ruler o’er Orchomenus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Minyeian town, and o’er the realm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pylos. Three illustrious sons she bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Neleus⁠—Nestor, Chromius, and a chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lofty bearing, Periclymenus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She brought forth Pero also, marvellous</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In beauty, wooed by all the region round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>but Neleus would bestow the maid on none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save him who should drive off from Phylacè</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beeves, broad-fronted and with crooked horns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of valiant Iphicles⁠—a difficult task.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One man alone, a blameless prophet, dared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attempt it; but he found himself withstood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By fate, and rigid fetters, and a force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rustic herdsmen. Months and days went by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the full year, led by the hours, came round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The valiant Iphicles, who from the seer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had heard the oracles explained, took off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shackles, and the will of Jove was done.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then saw I Leda, wife of Tyndarus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who bore to Tyndarus two noble sons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Castor the horseman, Pollux skilled to wield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cestus. Both of them have still a place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the fruitful earth; for Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave them such honor that they live by turns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each one a day, and then are with the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each one by turns; they rank among the gods.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The wife of Aloëus next appeared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Iphidameia, who, as she declared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had won the love of Neptune. She brought forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two short-lived sons⁠—one like a god in form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Named Otus; and the other, far renowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Named Ephialtes. These the bounteous earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nourished to be the tallest of mankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And goodliest, save Orion. When the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had seen but nine years of their life, they stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In breadth of frame nine cubits, and in height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine fathoms. They against the living gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threatened to wage, upon the Olympian height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce and tumultuous battle, and to fling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ossa upon Olympus, and to pile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelion, with all its growth of leafy woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Ossa, that the heavens might thus be scaled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they, if they had reached their prime of youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had made their menace good. The son of Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And amber-haired Latona took their lives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere yet beneath their temples sprang the down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And covered with its sprouting tufts the chin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Phaedra I saw, and Procris, and the child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the wise Minos, Ariadne, famed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For beauty, whom the hero Theseus once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Crete to hallowed Athens’ fertile coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led, but possessed her not. Diana gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ear to the tale which Bacchus brought to her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the isle of Dia slew the maid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And Maera I beheld, and Clymenè,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Eriphylè, hateful in her guilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sold her husband for a price in gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But vainly might I think to name them all⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wives and daughters of heroic men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom I beheld⁠—for first the ambrosial night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would wear away. And now for me the hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sleep is come, at my good ship among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My friends, or haply here. Meantime the care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my return is with the gods and you.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and all were silent: all within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadows of those palace-halls were held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Motionless by the charm of what he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus the white-armed Queen Aretè spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Phaeacians, how appears this man to you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In form, in stature, and well-judging mind?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My guest he is, but each among you shares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The honor of the occasion. Now, I pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dismiss him not in haste, nor sparingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestow your gifts on one in so much need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in your dwellings is much wealth, bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon you by the bounty of the gods.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then also Echeneüs, aged chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The oldest man of the Phaeacians, spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My friends, the word of our sagacious queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Errs not, nor is ill-timed, and yours it is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hearken and obey: but all depends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon Alcinoüs⁠—both the word and deed.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then in turn Alcinoüs spake: “That word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall be fulfilled, if I am ruler here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the Phaeacians, skilled in seamanship.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let the stranger, though he long for home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear to remain till morning, that his store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gifts may be complete. To send him home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall be the charge of all, but mostly mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since mine it is to hold the sovereign power.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the wise Ulysses said: “O King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcinoüs, eminent o’er all thy race!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst thou command me to remain with thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even for a twelvemonth, and at length provide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my return, and give me princely gifts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even that would please me; for with fuller hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The happier were my lot on my return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my own land. I should be honored then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And meet a kinder welcome there from all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who see me in my Ithaca once more.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then again in turn Alcinoüs spake:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ulysses, when we look on thee, we feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No fear that thou art false, or one of those,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The many, whom the dark earth nourishes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wandering at large, and forging lies, that we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May not suspect them. Thou hast grace of speech</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And noble thoughts, and fitly hast thou told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as a minstrel might, the history</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all thy Argive brethren and thy own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now say, and frankly, didst thou also see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Any of those heroic men who went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thee to Troy, and in that region met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fate? A night immeasurably long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is yet before us. Let us have thy tale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wonders. I could listen till the break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hallowed morning, if thou canst endure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So long to speak of hardships thou hast borne.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and wise Ulysses answered thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O King Alcinoüs, eminent beyond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All others of thy people. For discourse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is a time; there is a time for sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If more thou yet wouldst hear, I will not spare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give the story of the greater woes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my companions, who were afterward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut off from life; and though they had escaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cruel Trojan war, on their return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They perished by a woman’s fraud and guilt.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When chaste Proserpina had made the ghosts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of women scatter right and left, there came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soul of Agamemnon, Atreus’ son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came attended by a throng of those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in the palace of Aegisthus met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fate like his and died. When he had drunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dark red blood, he knew me at a look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wailed aloud, and, bursting into tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretched out his hands to touch me; but no power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was there of grasp or pressure, such as once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwelt in those active limbs. I could not help</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But weep at sight of him, for from my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I pitied him, and spake these winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Most glorious son of Atreus, king of men!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How, Agamemnon, has the fate that brings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To man the everlasting sleep of death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ertaken thee? Did Neptune, calling up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winds in all their fury, make thy fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wreck, or did thine enemies on land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smite thee, as thou wert driving off their beeves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their fair flocks, or fighting to defend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some city, and the helpless women there?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake, and Agamemnon thus replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Son of Laertes, nobly born and wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas not that Neptune calling up the winds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all their fury wrecked me in my fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor hostile warriors smote me on the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that Aegisthus, bent upon my death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plotted against me with my guilty wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade me to his house and slew me there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even at the banquet, as a hind might slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bullock at the stall. With me they slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My comrades, as a herd of white-toothed swine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are slaughtered for some man of large estates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who makes a wedding or a solemn feast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast seen many perish by the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the hard battle, one by one, and yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wouldst have pitied us, hadst thou beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slain beside the wine-jar, and beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loaded tables, while the pavement swam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With blood. I heard Cassandra’s piteous cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cry of Priam’s daughter, stricken down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By treacherous Clytemnestra at my side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there I lay, and, dying, raised my hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To grasp my sword. The shameless woman went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her way, nor stayed to close my eyes, nor press</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mouth into its place, although my soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was on its way to Hades. There is naught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lives more horrible, more lost to shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than is the woman who has brought her mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To compass deeds like these⁠—the wretch who plans</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So foul a crime⁠—the murder of the man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom she a virgin wedded. I had looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a warm welcome from my children here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all my household in my ancient home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This woman, deep in wickedness, hath brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disgrace upon herself and all her sex,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even those who give their thoughts to doing good.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake, and I replied: ‘O, how the God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who wields the thunder, Jupiter, must hate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The house of Atreus for the women’s sake!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At first we fell by myriads in the cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Helen; Clytemnestra now hath planned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This guile against thee while thou wert afar.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake, and instantly his answer came:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Therefore be not compliant to thy wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor let her hear from thee whatever lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within thy knowledge. Tell her but a part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And keep the rest concealed. Yet is thy life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, in no danger from thy spouse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For wise and well instructed in the rules</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of virtuous conduct is Penelope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daughter of Icarius. When we went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To war, we left her a young bride; a babe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was at her breast, a boy, who now must sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among grown men; and fortunate is he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For certainly his father will behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youth on his return, and he embrace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His father, as is meet. But as for me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My consort suffered not my eyes to feed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the sight of my own son; for first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She slew me. This, then, I admonish thee⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heed thou my words. Bring not thy ship to land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Openly in thy country, but by stealth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since now no longer can we put our trust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In woman. Meantime, tell me of my son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And faithfully, if thou hast heard of him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As living, whether in Orchomenus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or sandy Pylos, or in the broad realm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Menelaus, Sparta; for not yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has my Orestes passed from earth and life.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake, and I replied: ‘Why ask of me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That question, O Atrides? I know not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether thy son be living or be dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this is not a time for idle words.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus in sad talk we stood, and freely flowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our tears. Meanwhile the ghosts of Peleus’ son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, and Patroclus, excellent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antilochus, and Ajax, all drew near⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ajax for form and stature eminent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er all the Greeks save Peleus’ faultless son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then did the soul of fleet Aeacides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know me, and thus in winged words he said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Ulysses! what hath moved thee to attempt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This greatest of thy labors? How is it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou hast found the courage to descend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hades, where the dead, the bodiless forms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those whose work is done on earth, abide?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake; I answered: ‘Greatest of the Greeks!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, son of Peleus! ’Twas to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The counsel of Tiresias that I came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If haply he might tell me by what means</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To reach my rugged Ithaca again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For yet have I not trod my native coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor even have drawn nigh to Greece. I meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Misfortunes everywhere. But as for thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, no man lived before thy time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor will hereafter live, more fortunate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than thou⁠—for while alive we honored thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if thou wert a god, and now again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these abodes thou rulest o’er the dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore, Achilles, shouldst thou not be sad.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake; Achilles quickly answered me:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Noble Ulysses, speak not thus of death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if thou couldst console me. I would be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A laborer on earth, and serve for hire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some man of mean estate, who makes scant cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather than reign o’er all who have gone down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To death. Speak rather of my noble son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether or not he yet has joined the wars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fight among the foremost of the host.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tell me also if thou aught hast heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of blameless Peleus⁠—whether he be yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honored among his many Myrmidons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or do they hold him now in small esteem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Hellas and in Phthia, since old age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unnerves his hands and feet, and I no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am there, beneath the sun, to give him aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong as I was on the wide plain of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When warring for the Achaian cause I smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That valiant people. Could I come again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for a moment, with my former strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into my father’s palace, I would make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That strength and these unconquerable hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A terror to the men who do him wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rob him of the honor due a king.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake; I answered: ‘Nothing have I heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of blameless Peleus, but I will relate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The truth concerning Neoptolemus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy son, as thou requirest. Him I took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Scyros in a gallant barque to join</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The well-armed Greeks. Know, then, that when we sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In council, planning to conduct the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the city of Troy, he always rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first to speak, nor were his words unwise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The godlike Nestor and myself alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rivalled him in debate. And when we fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the city walls, he loitered not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the others in the numerous host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hastened on before them, giving place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To no man there in valor. Many men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He slew in desperate combat, whom to name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were past my power, so many were they all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom in the cause of Greece he struck to earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet one I name, Eurypylus, the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Telephus, who perished by his sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many of his band, Citeians, led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To war because of liberal gifts bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon their chieftain’s wife; the noblest he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men, in form, whom I have ever seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save Memnon. When into the wooden steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Framed by Epeius, we the chiefs of Greece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ascended, and to me was given the charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all things there, to open and to shut</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The close-built fraud, while others of high rank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Greeks were wiping off their tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their limbs shook, I never saw thy son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turn pale in his fine face, or brush away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tear, but he besought me earnestly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he might leave our hiding-place, and grasped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His falchion’s hilt, and lifted up his spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavy with brass, for in his mind he smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan crowd already. When at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We had o’erthrown and sacked the lofty town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam, he embarked upon a ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all his share of spoil⁠—a large reward⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhurt, not touched in combat hand to hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor wounded from afar, as oftentimes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must be the fortune of a fight, for Mars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is wont to rage without regard to men.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake. The soul of swift Aeacides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the meadows thick with asphodel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Departed with long strides, well pleased to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From me the story of his son’s renown.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The other ghosts of those who lay in death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood sorrowing by, and each one told his griefs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that of Ajax, son of Telamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept far aloof, displeased that I had won</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victory contending at the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which should possess the arms of Peleus’ son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His goddess-mother laid them as a prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before us, and the captive sons of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pallas were the umpires to award</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victory. And now how much I wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had not conquered in a strife like that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since for that cause the dark earth hath received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero Ajax, who in nobleness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of form and greatness of exploits excelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All other Greeks, except the blameless son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus. Then I spake in soothing words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘O Ajax, son of blameless Telamon!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou not even in death forget the wrath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caused by the strife for those accursed arms?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods have made them fatal to the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou, the bulwark of our host, didst fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we lamented thee as bitterly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou wert dead as we had mourned the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus. Nor was any man to blame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas Jupiter who held in vehement hate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The army of the warlike Greeks, and laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This doom upon thee. Now, O king, draw near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hear our voice and words, and check, I pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The anger rising in thy generous breast.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake; he answered not, but moved away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Erebus, among the other souls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the departed. Yet would I have had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speech of him, angry as he was, or else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have spoken to him further, but my wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was strong to see yet others of the dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then I beheld the illustrious son of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Minos, a golden sceptre in his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sitting to judge the dead, who round the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleaded their causes. There they stood or sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Pluto’s halls⁠—a pile with ample gates.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And next I saw the huge Orion drive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the meadows green with asphodel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The savage beast whom he had slain; he bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brazen mace, which no man’s power could break.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And Tityus there I saw⁠—the mighty earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mother⁠—overspreading, as he lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine acres, with two vultures at his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, plucking at his liver, plunged their beaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the flesh; nor did his hands avail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drive them off, for he had offered force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Jove’s proud wife Latona, as she went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Pytho, through the pleasant Panopeus.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And next I looked on Tantalus, a prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To grievous torments, standing in a lake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That reached his chin. Though painfully athirst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could not drink; as often as he bowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His aged head to take into his lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The water, it was drawn away, and sank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the earth, and the dark soil appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around his feet; a god had dried it up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lofty trees drooped o’er him, hung with fruit⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pears and pomegranates, apples fair to sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And luscious figs, and olives green of hue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when that ancient man put forth his hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pluck them from their stems, the wind arose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whirled them far among the shadowy clouds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There I beheld the shade of Sisyphus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid his sufferings. With both hands he rolled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A huge stone up a hill. To force it up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He leaned against the mass with hands and feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, ere it crossed the summit of the hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A power was felt that sent it rolling back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And downward plunged the unmanageable rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him to the plain. Again he toiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To heave it upward, while the sweat in streams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran down his limbs, and dust begrimed his brow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then I beheld the mighty Hercules⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero’s image⁠—for he sits himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the deathless gods, well pleased to share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their feasts, and Hebe of the dainty feet⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A daughter of the mighty Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And golden-sandalled Juno⁠—is his wife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around his image flitted to and fro</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ghosts with noise, like fear-bewildered birds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His look was dark as night. He held in hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A naked bow, a shaft upon the string,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fiercely gazed, like one about to send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arrow forth. Upon his breast he wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The formidable baldric, on whose band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold were sculptured marvels⁠—forms of bears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wild boars, grim lions, battles, skirmishings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And death by wounds, and slaughter. He who wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That band had never done the like before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor could thereafter. As I met his eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero knew me, and, beholding me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pity, said to me in winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Son of Laertes, nobly born and wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet unhappy; surely thou dost bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cruel fate, like that which I endured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet I saw the brightness of the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The offspring of Saturnian Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am I, and yet was I compelled to serve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of a meaner race than I, who set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Difficult tasks. He sent me hither once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring away the guardian hound; he deemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No harder task might be. I brought him hence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I led him up from Hades, with such aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Hermes and the blue-eyed Pallas gave.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus having spoken, he withdrew again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the abode of Pluto. I remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kept my place, in hope there yet might come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heroes who perished in the early time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And haply I might look on some of those⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ancients, whom I greatly longed to see⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Theseus and Pirithoüs, glorious men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The children of the gods. But now there flocked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already round me, with a mighty noise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The innumerable nations of the dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I grew pale with fear, lest from the halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pluto the stern Proserpine should send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The frightful visage of the monster-maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Gorgon. Hastening to my ship, I bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crew embark, and cast the hawsers loose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly they went on board, and took their seats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the benches. Through Océanus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The current bore my galley, aided first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By oars and then by favorable gales.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
