<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book XVI: Ulysses Discovering Himself to Telemachus</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-16" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Ulysses Discovering Himself to Telemachus</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Reception of Telemachus by Eumaeus, who is sent to inform Penelope of her son’s arrival⁠—interview of Ulysses and Telemachus, in which, at the command of Pallas, Ulysses discovers himself⁠—Return of the disappointed suitors from lying in wait for Telemachus.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime Ulysses and that noble hind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swineherd, in the lodge, at early dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lighted a fire, prepared a meal, and sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herdsmen forth to drive the swine afield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dogs, so apt to bark, came fawning round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And barked not as Telemachus drew near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses heard the sound of coming feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And marked the crouching dogs, and suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bespake Eumaeus thus with winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Eumaeus, without doubt some friend of thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or someone known familiarly, is near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no barking of the dogs; they fawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around him, and I hear the sound of feet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Scarce had he spoken, when within the porch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood his dear son. The swineherd starting up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surprised, let fall the vessels from his hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which he mingled the rich wines, and flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet his master; kissed him on the brow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kissed both his shining eyes and both his hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many tears. As when a father takes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into his arms a son whom tenderly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He loves, returning from a distant land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the tenth year⁠—his only son, the child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his old age, for whom he long has borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hardship and grief⁠—so to Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swineherd clung, and kissed him o’er and o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one escaped from death, and, shedding still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warm tears, bespake him thus with winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou comest, O Telemachus! the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not more sweet to me. I never thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see thee more when thou hadst once embarked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Pylos. Now come in, beloved child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let my heart rejoice that once again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have thee here, so newly come from far.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ’tis not often that thou visitest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herdsmen and fields, but dwellest in the town⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such is thy will⁠—beholding day by day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wasteful pillage of the suitor-train.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus discreet Telemachus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“So be it, father; for thy sake I came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see thee with these eyes, and hear thee speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tell me if my mother dwells within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace yet; or has some wooer led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The queen away, his bride, and does the couch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of great Ulysses lie untapestried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With ugly cobwebs gathering over it?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the master swineherd spake in turn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Most true it is that with a constant mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The queen inhabits yet thy palace halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wastes in tears her wretched nights and days.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So speaking he received his brazen lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over the stone threshold passed the prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the lodge. Ulysses yielded up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His seat to him; Telemachus forbade.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nay, stranger, sit; it shall be ours to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Elsewhere a seat in this our lodge, and he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who should provide it is already here.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; Ulysses turned, and took again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His place; the swineherd made a pile of twigs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And covered it with skins, on which sat down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dear son of Ulysses. Next he brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dishes of roasted meats which yet remained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part of the banquet of the day before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heaped the canisters with bread, and mixed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rich wines in a wooden bowl. He sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right opposite Ulysses. All put forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hands and shared the meats upon the board;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the calls of thirst and hunger ceased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to the swineherd said Telemachus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Whence, father, is this stranger, and how brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By seamen to the coast of Ithaca?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who are they that brought him?⁠—for I deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came not over to our isle on foot.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus, Eumaeus, thou didst make reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“True answer will I make to all. He claims</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be a son of the broad isle of Crete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And says that in his wanderings he has passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through many cities of the world, for so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some god ordained; and now, escaped by flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a Thesprotian galley, he has sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A refuge in my lodge. Into thy hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I give him; deal thou with him as thou wilt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is thy suppliant, and makes suit to thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake discreet Telemachus again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Eumaeus, thou hast uttered words that pierce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart with pain; for how can I receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stranger at my house? I am a youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who never yet has trusted in his arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To beat the offerer of an insult back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in my mother’s mind the choice is yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncertain whether to remain with me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mistress of my household, keeping still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her constant reverence for her husband’s bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still obedient to the people’s voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or whether she shall follow as a bride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him of the Achaian suitors in my halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who is accounted worthiest, and who brings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The richest gifts. Now, as to this thy guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since he has sought thy lodge, I give to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cloak and tunic, seemly of their kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A two-edged sword, and sandals for his feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will send him to whatever coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He may desire to go. Yet, if thou wilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lodge him beneath thy roof, and I will send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raiment and food, that he may be no charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee or thy companions. To my house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the suitor-train I cannot bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he should go. Those men are insolent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond all measure; they would scoff at him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And greatly should I grieve. The boldest man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against so many might contend in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And greater is their power by far than mine.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake Ulysses, the great sufferer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O friend⁠—since I have liberty to speak⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My very heart is wounded when I hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What wrongs the suitors practise in thy halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against a youth like thee. But give me leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ask if thou submittest willingly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or do thy people, hearkening to some god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hate thee with open hatred? Dost thou blame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy brothers?⁠—for in brothers men confide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even in a desperate conflict. Would that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were young again, and with the will I have,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or that I could become Ulysses’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or were that chief himself returned at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all his wanderings⁠—and there yet is hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his return⁠—then might another strike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My head off if I would not instantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enter the house of Laertiades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make myself a mischief to them all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But should they overcome me, thus alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contending with such numbers, I would choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather in mine own palace to be slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than every day behold such shameful deeds⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insulted guests, maidservants foully dragged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through those fair palace chambers, wine-casks drained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gluttons feasting idly, wastefully,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And others toiling for them without end.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake again discreet Telemachus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Stranger, thou shalt be answered faithfully.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know, then, the people are by no means wroth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With me, nor have I brothers to accuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though in a desperate conflict men rely</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a brother’s aid. Saturnian Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confines our lineage to a single head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king Arcesius had an only son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laertes, and to him was only born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses; and Ulysses left me here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The only scion of his house, and he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had little joy of me. Our halls are filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With enemies, the chief men of the isles⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dulichium, Samos, and Zacynthus dark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With forests, and the rugged Ithaca⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many woo my mother and consume</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our substance. She rejects not utterly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hateful suit, nor yet will give consent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And end it. They go on to waste my wealth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And soon will end me also; but the event</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rests with the gods.⁠—And go thou now with speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eumaeus, father, to Penelope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And say that I am safe, and just returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Pylos. I remain within the lodge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then come back as soon as thou hast told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The queen alone. Let none of all the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear aught; for they are plotting harm to me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then thus, Eumaeus, thou didst make reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Enough, I see it all, thy words are said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To one who understands them. But, I pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Direct me whether in my way to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A message to Laertes, the distressed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While sorrowing for Ulysses he o’ersaw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The labors of the field, and ate and drank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he had appetite, with those who wrought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But since thy voyage to the Pylian coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They say he never takes his daily meals</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he was wont, nor oversees the work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sits and mourns and sighs and pines away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until his limbs are shrivelled to the bone.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake discreet Telemachus again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ’Tis sad, but we must leave him to his grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little while. Could everything be made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To happen as we mortals wish, I then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would first desire my father’s safe return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou, when thou hast given thy message, haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither again, nor wander through the fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him; but let my mother send at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The matron of her household, privately,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear the tidings to the aged man.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake to speed the swineherd, who took up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sandals, bound them on, and bent his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Townward. Not unperceived by Pallas went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eumaeus from the lodge. She came in shape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A woman beautiful and stately, skilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In household arts, the noblest. Near the gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She stood, right opposite. Ulysses saw;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus beheld her not; the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not always manifest themselves to all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses and the mastiffs saw; the dogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Barked not, but, whimpering, fled from her and sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stalls within. She beckoned with her brows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses knew her meaning and came forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And passed the great wall of the court, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood near to Pallas, who bespake him thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Son of Laertes, nobly born and wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak with thy son; conceal from him the truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer, that, prepared to make an end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that vile suitor-crew, ye may go up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the royal town. Nor long will I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be absent; I am ready for the assault.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus spake the goddess. Putting forth a wand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold, she touched the chief. Beneath that touch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His breast was covered with a new-blanched robe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tunic. To his frame it gave new strength;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His swarthy color came again, his cheeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew full, and the beard darkened on his chin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This done, she disappeared. Ulysses came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the lodge again; his son beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amazed and overawed, and turned his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away, as if in presence of a god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus bespake the chief with winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O stranger, thou art other than thou wert;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy garb is not the same, nor are thy looks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou surely art some deity of those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose habitation is the ample heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be gracious to us, let us bring to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such sacrifices as thou wilt accept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gifts of graven gold; be merciful.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the great sufferer, thus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I am no god; how am I like the gods?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am thy father, he for whom thy sighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are breathed, and sorrows borne, and wrongs endured.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake and kissed his son, and from his lids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tears fell to earth, that long had been restrained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then Telemachus, who could not think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stranger was his father, answered thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nay, thou art not my father, thou art not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses; rather hath some deity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought to deceive me, that my grief may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sharper; for no mortal man would do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What has been done, unless some god should come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To aid him, and to make him young or old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At pleasure; for thou wert a moment since</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An aged man, and sordidly arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now art like the gods of the wide heaven.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It is not well, Telemachus, to greet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With boundless wonder and astonishment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy father in this lodge. Be sure of this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That no Ulysses other than myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will ever enter here. I, who am he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have suffered greatly and have wandered far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the twentieth year am come again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mine own land. Thou hast beheld today</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wonder wrought by Pallas, huntress-queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who makes me what she will, such power is hers⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes to seem a beggar, and in turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A young man in a comely garb. The gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose home is in the heavens can easily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exalt a mortal man, or bring him low.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake and sat him down. Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around his glorious father threw his arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shed a shower of tears. Both felt at heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A passionate desire to weep; they wept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aloud⁠—and louder were their cries than those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of eagles, or the sharp-clawed vulture tribe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose young the hinds have stolen, yet unfledged.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still flowed their tears abundantly; the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would have gone down and left them weeping still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not Telemachus at length inquired:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Dear father, tell me in what galley came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mariners who brought thee. Of what race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Claim they to be? For certainly, I think,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou cam’st not hither travelling on foot.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the great sufferer, thus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My son, thou shalt be answered faithfully.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men of a race renowned for seamanship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phaeacians, brought me hither. They convey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abroad the strangers coming to their isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, bearing me in one of their swift barques</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the sea, they landed me asleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Ithaca. Rich were the gifts they gave⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much brass and gold, and garments from the loom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These, so the gods have counselled, lie concealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the hollow rocks, and I am come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obeying Pallas, to consult with thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to destroy our enemies. Give now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The number of the suitors; let me know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How many there may be, and who they are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with a careful judgment I may weigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The question whether we shall fall on them⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We two alone⁠—or must we seek allies.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake discreet Telemachus again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O father, I have heard of thy great fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My whole life long⁠—how mighty is thy arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How wise thy counsels. Thou hast said great things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I am thunderstruck. It cannot be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That two alone should stand before a crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of valiant men. They are not merely ten⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These suitors⁠—nor twice ten, but many more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear, then, their number. From Dulichium come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fifty and two, the flower of all its youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With whom are six attendants. Samos sends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twice twelve, and twenty more Achaian chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come from Zacynthus. Twelve from Ithaca;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noblest of the isle are these⁠—with whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Medon the herald comes⁠—a bard whose song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is heavenly⁠—and two servants skilled to spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The banquet. Should we in the palace halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assault all these, I fear lest the revenge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all thy wrongs would end most bitterly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grievously for thee. Now, if thy thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be turned to some ally, bethink thee who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will combat for us with a willing heart.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again Ulysses, the great sufferer, spake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Then will I tell thee; listen, and give heed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think whether Pallas and her father, Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suffice not for us. Need we more allies?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then discreet Telemachus rejoined:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Assuredly the twain whom thou hast named</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are mighty as allies; for though they sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On high among the clouds, they yet bear rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both o’er mankind and o’er the living gods.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Once more Ulysses, the great sufferer, spake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Not long will they avoid the fierce affray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When in my halls the strength of war is tried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between me and the suitor crew. Now go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With early morning to thy home, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mingle among the suitors. As for me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swineherd afterward shall lead me hence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To town, a wretched beggar seemingly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And very old. If there they scoff at me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mine own palace, let thy faithful heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endure it, though I suffer; though they seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My feet, and by them drag me to the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or strike at me with weapon-blades, look on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear it; yet reprove with gentle words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their folly. They will never heed reproof;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The day of their destruction is at hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this I tell thee further, and be sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep my words in memory. As soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Pallas, goddess of wise counsel, gives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warning, I shall nod to thee, and thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou perceivest it, remove at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All weapons from my halls to a recess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High in an upper chamber. With soft words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quiet the suitors when they ask thee why.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say, ‘I would take them where there comes no smoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since now they seem no longer like to those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left by Ulysses when he sailed for Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But soiled and tarnished by the breath of fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This graver reason, also, Saturn’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath forced upon my mind⁠—that ye by chance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When full of wine and quarrelling, may wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each other, and disgrace the feast, and bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shame on your wooing; for the sight of steel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draws men to bloodshed.’ Say but this, and leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two swords for us, two spears, two oxhide shields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the day of combat. Pallas then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Jove the All-disposer, will unman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hearts. Moreover, let me say to thee⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And keep my words in memory⁠—if thou be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My son, and of my blood, let no man hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That now Ulysses is within the isle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let not Laertes hear of it, nor him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who keeps the swine, nor any of the train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of servants, nor Penelope herself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While thou and I alone search out and prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The women of the household, and no less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The serving-men, to know who honors us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bears us reverence in his heart, and who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contemns us, and dishonors even thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then answered his illustrious son and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Father, thou yet wilt know my heart, and find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That of a careless and too easy mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am not; but a search like this, I think,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would profit neither of us, and I pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou wilt well consider it. Long time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldst thou go wandering from place to place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er thy estates, to prove the loyalty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of everyone, while in thy halls at ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitors wastefully consume thy wealth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet would I counsel that the women’s faith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be proved, that the disloyal may be marked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the innocent go free. As for the men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would not now inquire from farm to farm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That may be done hereafter, if indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast a sign from aegis-bearing Jove.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So talked they with each other. The good ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which brought Telemachus and all his friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Pylos kept meantime upon its way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Ithaca. There, entering the deep port,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seamen hauled the black ship up the beach;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the ready servants took away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arms, and to the house of Clytius bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The costly gifts. A herald from the ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went forward to the palace of the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tidings to the sage Penelope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That now her son was come and in the fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that the ship at his command had reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city, lest the royal dame might feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear for his safety, and give way to tears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herald and the noble swineherd met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each bearing the same message to the queen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entering the palace of the godlike king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And standing midst the maids, the herald said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O lady, thy beloved son is come.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But close beside the queen the swineherd stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And told her everything which her dear son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had bid him say; and, having thus fulfilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His errand, left the palace and its court.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then were the suitors vexed and sorrowful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And going from the palace, and without</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great wall that enclosed the court, sat down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the gates, and there Eurymachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Polybus, harangued the throng:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Behold, my friends, Telemachus has done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A marvellous thing; this voyage, which we thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could not make, is made. Now let us launch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ship, the best that we can find, and man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fishermen the benches, sending it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find our friends, and hasten their return.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Scarce had he spoken when Amphinomus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In turning where he stood, beheld a barque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enter the port’s deep waters, with a crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That furled the sails and held the oars in hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He laughed, well pleased, and to the suitors said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There needs no message to be sent, for they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are here already. Haply hath some god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Given them the knowledge, or perchance they saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But could not overtake, the prince’s ship.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; they rose and hastened to the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quickly drew the galley up the beach.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ready servants bore the arms away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then met they all in council, suffering none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save of the suitor-train to meet with them⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None, either young or old. Eupeithes’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antinoüs, standing forth, bespake them thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“How strangely do the gods protect this man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From evil! All day long spy after spy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has sat and watched upon the airy heights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the sun was set we never slept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On land, but ever in our gallant ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sailed, waiting for the holy morn, and lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In constant ambush for Telemachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seize and to destroy him. Yet behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some deity has brought him home. And now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frame we a plan to cut off utterly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus, and leave him no escape;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For certainly I think that while he lives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The end we aim at cannot be attained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrewd is the youth in counsel and device,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we no longer have, as once we had,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people’s favor. Let us quickly act,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere he can call a council of the Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he will do without delay, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will rise in wrath to tell them how we planned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His death by violence, and failed; and they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hear assuredly will not approve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plotted mischief. They may drive us forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With outrage from our country to a land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of strangers. Let us be the first to strike,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slay him in the fields or on the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, taking his possessions to ourselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Share equally his wealth. Then may we give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This palace to his mother, and the man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom she shall wed, whoever he may be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if this plan mislike you, and ye choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he should live, and keep the fair estate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was his father’s, let us not go on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thronging the palace to consume his wealth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In revelry, but each with liberal gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woo her from his own dwelling; and let him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who gives most generously, and whom fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most favors, take the lady as his bride.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and all were mute. Amphinomus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The illustrious son of royal Nisus, rose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grandson of Aretias, it was he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who led the suitors from Dulichium’s fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grassy and rich in corn. Penelope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Liked best his words, for generous was his thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a generous purpose thus he spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nay, friends, not mine is the advice to slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus. It is a fearful thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take a royal life. Then let us first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inquire the pleasure of the gods. For if</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The oracles of mighty Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approve it, I would do the deed myself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or bid another do it; but if they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consent not, ’tis my counsel to forbear.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and all approved. At once they rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, entering the palace, sat them down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On shining thrones. Meantime Penelope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had formed the purpose to appear before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arrogant suitors, for the news was brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into her chamber of the plot to slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her son; the herald Medon overheard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And told her all. So to the hall she went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her attendant maids. The glorious dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew near the suitor-train, and took her stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside a column of the stately pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a delicate veil before her cheeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to speak, and chid Antinoüs thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Antinoüs, mischief-plotter, insolent!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rumor is that thou excellest all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy own age among the Ithacans</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In understanding and in speech. Yet such</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou never wert. Ferocious as thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why seek the death of my Telemachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And treat with scorn the suppliants of whose prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove is the witness? An unholy thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is when men against their fellow-men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plot mischief. Dost thou then forget that once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy father came to us a fugitive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In terror of the people, who were wroth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because he joined the Taphian pirate-race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plundered the Thesprotians, our allies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people would have slain him, and have torn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heart out, and have pillaged his large wealth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses checked their rage, and held them back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce as they were. Now thou dost waste his goods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most shamefully, and woo his wife, and slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His son, and multiply my woes. Cease now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I charge thee, and persuade the rest to cease.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Eurymachus, the son of Polybus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Replied: “O daughter of Icarius, sage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Penelope, take heart; let no such thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Possess thy mind. There is no man on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor will there be, who shall lay violent hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon Telemachus, thy son, while I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am living, and yet keep the gift of sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I say, and will perform it⁠—his black blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall flow and bathe my spear. Ulysses oft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spoiler of realms, would take me on his knee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And put the roasted meats into my hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give me ruddy wine. I therefore hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus of all mankind most dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will bid him have no fear of death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From any of the suitors. If it come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent by the gods, he cannot then escape.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he to appease her, while he planned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The murder of her son. The queen went up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the fair upper chambers, and there wept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, her dear spouse, till o’er her lids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue-eyed Pallas poured the balm of sleep.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At evening to Ulysses and his son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble swineherd went, while busily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They made the supper ready, having slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A porker one year old. Then instantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood Pallas by Ulysses, and put forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her wand and touched him, making him again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old, and clad sordidly in beggar’s weeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest that the swineherd, knowing at a look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His master, might not keep the knowledge locked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his own breast, but, hastening forth, betray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The secret to the chaste Penelope.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then to the swineherd said Telemachus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Noble Eumaeus, welcome; what reports</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are in the town? Have those large-minded men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitors, left their ambush and returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or are they waiting yet for me to pass?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus, Eumaeus, thou didst make reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of that, indeed, I never thought to ask,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In going through the town. My only care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was to return, as soon as I had given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My message, with such speed as I could make.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I met a messenger, a herald sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thy companions, who was first to tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy mother of thy safe return. Yet this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know, for I beheld it with my eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When outside of the city, where the hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hermes stands, I saw a gallant barque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entering the port, and carrying many men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavy it was with shields and two-edged spears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas they, I thought, and yet I cannot tell.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; Telemachus the valiant looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his father with a smile unmarked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By good Eumaeus. When their task was done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the board spread, they feasted. No one lacked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His portion of the common meal. Their thirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hunger satisfied, they laid them down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rest, and so received the gift of sleep.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
