<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 17: Return of Ulysses to His Palace</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-17" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Return of Ulysses to His Palace</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Meeting of Telemachus and Penelope, Ulysses conducted by Eumaeus to the palace, where he is known by the dog Argus, who dies on seeing him⁠—Entrance of Ulysses among the suitors⁠—Assault made by Antinoüs upon Ulysses⁠—Ulysses sent for by Penelope.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Now when the rosy-fingered Morn looked forth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daughter of the Dawn⁠—Telemachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dear son of the great Ulysses, bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shapely sandals underneath his feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took the massive spear that fitted well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His grasp, and, as he stood in act to go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to the town, bespake the swineherd thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Father, I hasten to the town, that there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mother may behold me; for I think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She will not cease to grieve, and fear, and weep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till her eyes rest on me. I leave with thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charge of leading our unfortunate guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the city, there to beg his bread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whoever will may give him food and drink.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All men I cannot feed, and I have cares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough already. If he chafe at this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The worse for him. I like to speak my mind.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus Ulysses, the sagacious, spake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nor do I wish, my friend, to loiter here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better it is for one like me to beg</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In town than in the country. In the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whoever chooses will bestow his dole;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But here, if I remain about the stalls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am no longer of an age to do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that a master may require. Go thou;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This man, at thy command, will lead me hence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As soon as I have warmed me at the fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the air grows milder. This keen morning-cold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May end me, and the way, ye say, is long.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ended; from the lodge Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed quickly, meditating to destroy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitors. Coming to his stately home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He leaned his spear against a column’s shaft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, crossing the stone threshold, entered in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First Eurycleia, who had been his nurse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld him, as she spread the beautiful thrones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With skins, and ran to him with weeping eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round him other handmaids of the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of resolute Ulysses thronged. They gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fond welcome, kissing him upon the brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shoulders. Issuing from her chamber next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chaste Penelope, like Dian’s self</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In beauty, or like golden Venus, came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, weeping, threw her arms about her son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kissed him on his forehead and on both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His glorious eyes, and said, amidst her tears:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Light of my eyes! O my Telemachus!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou, then, come? I never thought again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see thee, when I heard thou hadst embarked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Pylos⁠—secretly, and knowing me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwilling⁠—in the hope to gather there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some tidings of thy father. Tell me now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that has happened, all that thou hast seen.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus discreet Telemachus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay, mother, waken not my griefs again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor move my heart to rage. I have just now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Escaped a cruel death. But go and bathe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And put fresh garments on, and when thou com’st</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into thy chamber with thy maidens, make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vow to all the gods that thou wilt burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sacrifice of chosen hecatombs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Jupiter shall have avenged our wrongs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now must I hasten to the marketplace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In quest of one who came with me a guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Pylos. Him, with all my faithful crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sent before me to this port, and bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Piraeus lead him to his own abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to be lodged and honored till I came.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, nor flew his words unheeded by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The princess bathed, and put fresh garments on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vowed to all the gods a sacrifice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of chosen hecatombs when Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should punish the wrongdoers. While she prayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus went forth, his spear in hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two fleet dogs followed him. Minerva shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A godlike beauty o’er his form and face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the people wondered as he came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitors thronged around him with smooth words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet plotting mischief in their hearts. He turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their assembly hastily, and took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His place where Mentor sat with Antiphus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Halitherses⁠—all his father’s friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his from the beginning. While they asked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all that he had seen, Piraeus came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The famous spearman, bringing through the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stranger with him to the marketplace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor long Telemachus delayed, but came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet his guest, and then Piraeus said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Telemachus, despatch to where I dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy serving-women; I would send to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once, the gifts which Menelaus gave.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And then discreet Telemachus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We know not yet, Piraeus, what may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The event; and if the suitors privily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should slay me in the palace, and divide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The inheritance among them, I prefer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou, instead of them, shouldst have the gifts;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But should they meet the fate which I have planned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be cut off, then shalt thou gladly bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The treasures, which I gladly will receive.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the prince, and to the palace led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unhappy man, his guest. When now they reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stately pile, they both laid down their cloaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the benches, and betook themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the well-polished baths. The attendant maids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There ministered and smoothed their limbs with oil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each received a tunic at their hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fleecy mantle. Then they left the baths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took their seats. A damsel came, and poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Water from a fair ewer wrought of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a silver basin for their hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spread a polished table near their seats;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there the matron of the household placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bread, and the many dishes which her stores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Supplied. The queen was seated opposite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside a column of the pile, and twirled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A slender spindle, while the son and guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put forth their hands and shared the meal prepared.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the calls of hunger and of thirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had ceased, thus spake the sage Penelope:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Telemachus, when I again go up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into my chamber, I shall lay me down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the couch which, since Ulysses sailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Troy with Atreus’ sons, has been to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A couch of mourning, sprinkled with my tears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now thou hast not chosen to reveal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere yet the haughty suitors throng again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into these halls, what in thy voyage thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast haply heard concerning his return.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus discreet Telemachus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Then, mother, will I truly tell thee all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We went to Pylos, and saw Nestor there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherd of the people. Kindly he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received me in his stately home, as one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might welcome back a wandering son returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From foreign lands. Such welcome I received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both from the king and his illustrious sons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put he had heard, he said, from living man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No tidings of the much-enduring chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, whether he were yet alive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or dead. He therefore sent me with his steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chariot to the court of Atreus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warlike Menelaus. There I saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Argive Helen, for whose sake the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Trojans, by the appointment of the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suffered so much. The valiant king inquired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What wish of mine had brought me to the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hallowed Lacedsemon. I replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And truly told him all, and everything</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In order. Then he answered me, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘So then! these men, unwarlike as they are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aspire to occupy a brave man’s bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a hart hath left two suckling fawns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just born, asleep in a strong lion’s lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roams for pasturage the mountain slopes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grassy lawns, the lion suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes back, and makes a cruel end of both,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So will Ulysses bring a sudden doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the suitors. Would to Father Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pallas, and Apollo, that the chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning mighty, as he was when once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In well-built Lesbos, at a wrestling-match,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rose to strive with Philomelides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And threw him heavily, and all the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoiced⁠—would he might come as then he was!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Short-lived would then the suitors be, and taste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bitter marriage-feast. But now, to come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To what thou hast inquired, I will not seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To turn from it, and talk of other things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor will deceive. Of all that I was told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the Ancient of the Deep, whose words are true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not hide a single word from thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw thy father in an isle, he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A prey to wasting sorrows, and detained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwilling, in the palace of the nymph</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calypso. To the country of his birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cannot come; no ships are there with oars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crew to bear him o’er the great wide sea.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus Menelaus, mighty with the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Atreus, said. And having now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fulfilled my errand, I returned. The gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave favoring winds, and sent me swiftly home.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ended, and the queen was deeply moved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Theoclymenus, the godlike, said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O gracious consort of Laertes’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Menelaus knew not all. Hear now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I shall say⁠—for I will prophesy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And truly, nor will keep back aught from thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let Jupiter, the mightiest of the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this thy hospitable board, and this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hearth of great Ulysses, where I find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A refuge, be my witnesses, that now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses is in his own land again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sits or walks observant of the deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wrong, and planning vengeance, yet to fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On all the suitors; such the augury</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which I beheld when in the gallant barque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sat and told it to Telemachus.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus the sage Penelope replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O stranger! may thy saying be fulfilled!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shalt thou have such thanks and such rewards</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all who greet thee shall rejoice with thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So talked they with each other. In the space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the palace of Ulysses stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitors, pleased with hurling quoits and spears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the smooth pavement, where their insolence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So oft was seen. But when the supper-hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was near, and from the fields the cattle came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driven by the herdsmen, Medon⁠—he whom most</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They liked of all the heralds, and who sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among them at the feast⁠—bespake them thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Youths! since ye now have had your pastime here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come in, and help prepare the evening meal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the due hour a banquet is not ill.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the suitors hearkened and obeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rose, and came into the halls, and laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their cloaks upon the benches and the thrones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slaughtered well-fed sheep and fading goats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made a victim of a pampered brawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a stalled ox, preparing for the feast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime Ulysses and that noble hind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swineherd hastened to begin their walk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To town, and thus the master swineherd spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Since, stranger, ’tis thy wish to pass today</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the city, as my master bade⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though I by far prefer that thou remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A guardian of the stalls, yet much I fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My master, and am sure that he would chide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And harsh the upbraidings of a master are⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us depart; the day is now far spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chill will be the air of eventide.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Enough; I know; thy words are heard by one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who understands them. Let us then depart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead thou the way; and if thou hast a staff,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut from the wood to lean on, give it me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since, as thou say’st, we have a slippery road.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and o’er his shoulders flung a scrip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old, cracked, and hanging by a twisted thong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eumaeus gave the staff he asked, and both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went forth; the dogs and herdsmen stayed to guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lodge. The swineherd led his master on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Townward, a squalid beggar to the sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And aged, leaning on a staff, and wrapped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sordid rags. There by the rugged way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they drew near the town, they passed a fount</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought by the hand of man, and pouring forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its pleasant streams, from which the citizens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew water. Ithacus and Neritus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Founded it with Polyctor, and a grove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of alders feeding on the moistened earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew round it on all sides. The ice-cold rill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gushed from a lofty rock, upon whose brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An altar stood, at which the passersby</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worshipped, and laid their offerings for the Nymphs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There did Melanthius, son of Dolius, meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The twain, as he was driving to the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The finest goats of all the flocks, to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A banquet for the suitors; with him went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two shepherds, following the flock. As soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he beheld Eumaeus and his guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He railed at them with rude and violent words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made the anger of Ulysses rise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“See that vile fellow lead the vile about!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus ever doth some god join like with like.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou worthless swineherd! whither wouldst thou take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This hungry, haunting beggar-man, this pest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of feasts, who at the posts of many a door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against them rubs his shoulders, asking crusts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tripods or caldrons never. Shouldst thou leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wretch to me, to watch my stalls, and sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The folds, and bring fresh branches to the kids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He might by drinking whey get stouter thighs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he has learned no good, and will refuse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To work; he better likes to stroll about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With that insatiable stomach, asking alms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fill it. Let me tell thee what is sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To happen to him, should he ever come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the palace of the glorious chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses. Many a footstool will be flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around him by the hands of those who sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As guests, and they will tear the fellow’s sides.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and in his folly thrust his heel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the hero’s thigh. The blow moved not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses from his path, nor swerved he aught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But meditated whether with a blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his good staff to take the fellow’s life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or lift him in the air and dash his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the ground. Yet he endured the affront</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And checked his wrath. The swineherd spake, and chid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The offender, and thus prayed with lifted hands:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nymphs of the fountain, born to Jupiter!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If e’er in sacrifice Ulysses burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To you the thighs of lambs and goats, o’erlaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fat, be pleased to grant the prayer I make,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, guided by some deity, the chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May yet return. Then thy rude boasts would cease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Melanthius, which thou utterest in thy way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From place to place while wandering through the town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unfaithful shepherds make a perishing flock.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Melanthius, keeper of the goats, rejoined:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ’Tis wonderful how flippant is the cur,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shrewd! But I shall carry him on board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A good black ship, far off from Ithaca,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there will sell him for a goodly price.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would that Apollo of the silver bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might in the palace slay Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This very hour, or that the suitors might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As certainly as that the day which brings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses to his home will never dawn!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and left them there. They followed on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly. Melanthius hastened, and was soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the king’s palace gate, and, entering, took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A seat right opposite Eurymachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose favorite he was. The attendants there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought meats, the matron of the household bread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And both were set before them. Meantime stopped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses with the noble swineherd near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace, for around them in the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came the sweet murmurs of a lyre. Just then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phemius, the minstrel, had begun his song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses took the swineherd’s hand, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Eumaeus, this must be the noble pile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which Ulysses dwelt, for easily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis known among the others that are near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rooms over rooms are here; around its court</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are walls and battlements, and folding-doors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shut fast the entrance; no man may contemn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its strength. And I perceive that many guests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Banquet within; the smoke of fat goes up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sweet lyre is heard; the gods have given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its music to accompany the feast.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then, Eumaeus, thou didst make reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou speakest rightly, and in other things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art not slow of thought. Now let us think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What we shall do. First enter, if thou wilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sumptuous rooms, while I remain without;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, if it please thee, I will enter first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While thou remainest; yet delay not long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest someone, seeing thee, should deal a blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or drive thee hence. I pray thee, think of this.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the great sufferer, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Enough; I know; thy words are heard by one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who understands them. Go before me, then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave me here. I am not quite unused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To blows and stripes, and patient is my mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For greatly have I suffered, both at sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the wars; and I submit to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This also. But the stomach’s eagerness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is desperate, and is not to be withstood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many are the mischiefs which it brings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the race of men; it fits out fleets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That cross the barren deep arrayed for war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And carry death and woe to hostile realms.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So talked the twain. A dog was lying near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lifted up his head and pricked his ears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas Argus, which the much-enduring man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses long before had reared, but left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untried, when for the hallowed town of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sailed. The young men oft had led him forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In eager chase of wild goats, stags, and hares;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, his master far away, he lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neglected, just before the stable doors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the droppings of the mules and beeves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaped high till carried to the spacious fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which Ulysses was the lord. There lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Argus, devoured with vermin. As he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses drawing near, he wagged his tail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dropped his ears, but found that he could come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No nearer to his master. Seeing this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses wiped away a tear unmarked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the good swineherd, whom he questioned thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Eumaeus, this I marvel at⁠—this dog,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lies upon the dunghill, beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In form, but whether in the chase as fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he is fairly shaped I cannot tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worthless, perchance, as house-dogs often are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose masters keep them for the sake of show.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus, Eumaeus, thou didst make reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The dog belongs to one who died afar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had he the power of limb which once he had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For feats of hunting when Ulysses sailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Troy and left him, thou wouldst be amazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both at his swiftness and his strength. No beast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the thick forest depths which once he saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or even tracked by footprints, could escape.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now he is a sufferer, since his lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has perished far from his own land. No more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The careless women heed the creature’s wants;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, when the master is no longer near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The servants cease from their appointed tasks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the day that one becomes a slave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Thunderer, Jove, takes half his worth away.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and, entering that fair dwelling-place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed through to where the illustrious suitors sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While over Argus the black night of death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came suddenly as soon as he had seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, absent now for twenty years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus, the godlike, was the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mark the swineherd coming through the hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, nodding, called to him. The swineherd looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About him, and beheld a seat on which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The carver of the feast was wont to sit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distributing the meats. He bore it thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And placed it opposite Telemachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at his table. Then he sat him down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thither came the herald, bringing him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A portion of the feast, and gave him bread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the full canister. Soon after him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses entered, seemingly an old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wretched beggar, propped upon a staff,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wrapped in sordid weeds. He sat him down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the ashen threshold, just within the doors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leaned against a shaft of cypress-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which some artificer had skilfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought by a line, and smoothed. Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called to the swineherd, bade him come, and took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A loaf that lay in the fair canister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the flesh which his two hands could grasp.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bear this to yonder stranger; bid him go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ask a dole from every suitor here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No beggar should be bashful in his need.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, the hind obeyed, and, drawing near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, said to him in winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“These from Telemachus, who bids thee ask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dole from every suitor, for he says</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No beggar should be bashful in his need.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“May Jove, the sovereign, make Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A happy man among the sons of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grant him all his heart desires in life!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and took the gift in both his hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid it down upon his tattered scrip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to his feet. Then, while the poet sang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ate, and, just as he had supped, the bard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Closed his divine recital. Then ensued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great clamor in the hall, but Pallas came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moved Ulysses to arise, and ask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From every suitor there a dole of bread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he might know the better from the worse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though none were to be spared. From right to left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took his way, and asked of every man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With outstretched hand, as if he had been long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A beggar. And they pitied him, and gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looked at him with wonder, and inquired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of another who he was, and whence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then spake Melanthius, keeper of the goats:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Give ear, ye suitors of the illustrious queen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to this stranger, I have seen him once.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swineherd brought him; but I know him not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of what race he is I cannot tell.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; Antinoüs chid the swineherd thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why hast thou brought him, too well known thyself?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have we not vagabonds enough? enough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sturdy beggars, pests of every feast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or is it a light matter that they throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither to waste the substance of thy lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore thou art with this fellow here?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus, Eumaeus, thou didst make reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Antinoüs, high as is thy station, thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast spoken ill. What man goes ever forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bid a stranger to his house, unless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stranger be of those whose office is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To serve the people, be he seer, or leech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or architect, or poet heaven-inspired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose song is gladly heard? All these are called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feasts wherever men are found; but none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call in the poor, to live upon their means.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antinoüs, thou, of all the suitor-train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost ever with the greatest harshness treat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The servants of Ulysses, chiefly me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I heed it not while sage Penelope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwells in the palace with her godlike son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then interposed discreet Telemachus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay, have no strife of words with him, I pray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antinoüs takes delight in bitter words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rails, and stirs up railing in the rest.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then he turned, and thus with winged words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bespake Antinoüs: “Truly thou dost care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For me as might a father for a son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bidding me drive a stranger from my door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With violent words⁠—which God forbid. Take now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhat and give to him. I grudge it not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, I advise it. Fear not to offend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mother, or displease a single one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the household of the godlike chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses. But thou hast not thought of this.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It suits thee best to feast and never give.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Antinoüs thus rejoined: “O utterer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of big and braggart words! Telemachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If all the other suitors would bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As much as I will, he would not be seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within these halls for three months yet to come.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So speaking, he brought forward to the sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From underneath the board, a stool, on which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rested his dainty feet. The others all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave somewhat to Ulysses, till his scrip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was filled with meat and bread Then as he went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to the threshold, there to feast on what</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks had given him in his rounds, he stopped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside Antinoüs, and bespake him thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Give somewhat also, friend. Thou dost not seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the humbler rank among the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But of the highest. Kingly is thy look;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It therefore will become thee to bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More freely than the rest, and I will sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy praise through all the earth. Mine too was once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A happy lot, for I inhabited</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A palace filled with goods, and often gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wanderers, whosoever they might be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sought me out, and in whatever need.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I had many servants, and large store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of everything by which men live at ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And are accounted rich. Saturnian Jove⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such was his pleasure⁠—brought me low; for, moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By him, I joined me to a wandering band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pirates, and to my perdition sailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a distant voyage to the coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Egypt. In the river of that land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I stationed my good ships, and bade my men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remain with them and watch them well. I placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sentries upon the heights. Yet confident</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their own strength, and rashly giving way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To greed, my comrades ravaged the fair fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Egyptians, slew them, and bore off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their wives and little ones. The rumor reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city soon; the people heard the alarm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came together. With the dawn of day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the great plain was thronged with horse and foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gleamed with brass, while Jove, the Thunderer, sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A deadly fear into our ranks, where none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dared face the foe. On every side was death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Egyptians hew r ed down many with the sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some they led away alive to toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For them in slavery. Me my captors gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a stranger’s hands, upon his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Cyprus, where he reigned, a mighty king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Demetor, son of Jasus. Thence at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I came through many hardships to this isle.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Antinoüs lifted up his voice, and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What god hath sent this nuisance to disturb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The banquet? Take thyself to the mid-hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from thy table, else expect to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An Egypt and a Cyprus of a sort</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou wilt little like. Thou art a bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shameless beggar. Thou dost take thy round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ask from each, and foolishly they give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spare not nor consider; well supplied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is each, and freely gives what is not his.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then sage Ulysses said as he withdrew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ’Tis strange; thy mind agrees not with thy form.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wouldst not give a suppliant even salt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thine own house⁠—thou who, while sitting here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fed at another’s table, canst not bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give me bread from thy well-loaded board.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. Antinoüs grew more angry still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And frowned and answered him with winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Dealer in saucy words! I hardly think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou wilt leave this palace unchastised.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and raised the footstool in his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote Ulysses on the lower part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the right shoulder. Like a rock he stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmoved beneath the blow Antinoüs gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But shook his head in silence as he thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of vengeance. Then, returning, he sat down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the threshold, where he laid his scrip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well filled, and thus bespake the suitor-train:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear me, ye suitors of the illustrious queen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grief or resentment no man feels for blows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received by him while fighting for his own⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His beeves or white-woolled sheep. But this man here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antinoüs, dealt that blow on me because</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have an empty stomach; hunger brings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great mischiefs upon men. If there be gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or furies who avenge the poor, may death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ertake Antinoüs ere his marriage-day!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ended. Then again Eupeithes’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antinoüs, spake: “Eat, stranger, quietly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sit still, or get thee hence; our young men else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hear thy words will seize thee by the feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hands, and drag thee forth and flay thee there.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and greatly were the rest incensed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one of those proud youths took up the word:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Antinoüs, it was ill of thee to smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hapless wanderer. Madman! what if he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came down from heaven and were a god! The gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put on the form of strangers from afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And walk our towns in many different shapes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mark the good and evil deeds of men.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus spake the suitors, but he heeded not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their words. Telemachus, who saw the blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt his heart swell with anger and with grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet from his eyelids fell no tear; he shook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head in silence, pondering to repay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wrong. Meantime the sage Penelope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard of the stranger smitten in her halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus bespake the maidens of her train:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Would that Apollo, mighty with the bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might smite thee also!” Then Eurynomè,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The matron of the household, said in turn:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O, were our prayers but heard, not one of these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should look upon the golden morn again!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake again the sage Penelope:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Mother, they all are hateful; everyone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plots mischief, but Antinoüs most of all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he is like black death, to be abhorred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A friendless stranger passes through these halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Compelled by need, and asks an alms of each,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the others give, and fill his scrip;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antinoüs flings a footstool, and the blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bruises the shoulder of the suppliant man.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So talked they with each other where they sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the queen’s chamber, mid the attendant train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of women, while meantime Ulysses took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The evening meal. The queen then bade to call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble swineherd, and bespake him thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My worthy friend Eumaeus, go and bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stranger hither. I would speak with him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ask if anywhere he saw or heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aught of Ulysses; for he seems like one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose wanderings have been in many lands.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus, Eumaeus, thou didst make reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Would that these Greeks, O queen, would hold their peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then might this stranger in thy hearing speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Words full of consolation. For three nights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had him with me, for three days I made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My lodge his home⁠—for at the very first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came to me, escaping from his ship⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor when he left me had he told of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he had suffered. As a hearer looks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a minstrel whom the gods have taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sing the poems that delight all hearts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, listening, longs to listen without end;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, as the stranger sat beneath my roof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He held me charmed. He was the ancestral friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, of thy Ulysses, and his home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Crete, where dwells the stock of Minos yet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Crete he came, and much had suffered since,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driven on from place to place. And he had heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some tidings of Ulysses yet alive⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he affirmed⁠—in a rich region near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The realm of the Thesprotians, and prepared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring much riches to his native isle.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake the sage Penelope again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Go, call him hither, that he may relate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His story in my presence. Let these men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it may please them, sitting at our gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or in our halls, amuse themselves, for light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are they of heart. Unwasted in their homes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lie their possessions, and their bread and wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are only for their servants, while themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frequent our palace, day by day, and slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our beeves and sheep and fatling goats, and feast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drink abundantly the dark red wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all with lavish waste. No man is here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as Ulysses was, to drive away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This pest from our abode. Should he return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his own land, he and his son would take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift vengeance on the men who do him wrong.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She ended. Suddenly Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sneezed loudly, so that all the palace rang;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, laughing as she heard, Penelope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bespake Eumaeus thus with winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Go, call the stranger. Dost thou not perceive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My son has sneezed as to confirm my words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not unfulfilled will now remain the doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That waits the suitors; none will now escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death and the Fates. This further let me say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou remember it; if what he tells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be true, I will bestow on him a change</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fair attire, a tunic and a cloak.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, the swineherd went, and, drawing near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, said to him in winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Stranger and father, sage Penelope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mother of the prince, hath sent for thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though sorrowing, she is minded to inquire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What of her husband thou canst haply say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And should she find that all thy words are true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She will bestow a tunic and a cloak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Garments which much thou needest. For thy food,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What will appease thy hunger thou wilt find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the people; ask, and each will give.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, much-enduring man, replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Eumaeus, faithfully will I declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that I know to sage Penelope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daughter of Icarius. Well I knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her husband, and with like calamities</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We both have suffered. But I greatly dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This reckless suitor-crew, whose riotous acts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And violence reach to the iron heavens.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even now, when that man dealt me, as I passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A painful blow, though I had done no harm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None interposed, not even Telemachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my defence. Now, therefore, ask, I pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Penelope that she will deign to wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till sunset in her rooms, though strong her wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear my history. Of her husband then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his return, she may inquire, while I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sit by the blazing hearth; for scant have been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My garments, as thou knowest, since the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first I came, a suppliant, to thy door.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the swineherd went, and as he crossed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The threshold of Penelope she said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou bringst him not, Eumaeus? What may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wanderer’s scruple? Fear of someone here?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or in a palace is he filled with awe?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be a bashful beggar is most hard.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus, Eumaeus, thou didst answer her:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Rightly he speaks, and just as one would think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who shuns the encounter of disorderly men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He prays that thou wilt wait till set of sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And better were it for thyself, O queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To speak with him and hear his words alone.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake discreet Penelope again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whoe’er may be the stranger, not unwise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He seems; for nowhere among men are done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such deeds of wrong and outrage as by these.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and the good swineherd, having told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lady all, went forth among the crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of suitors, drawing near Telemachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bowed his head beside him that none else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might hear, and said to him in winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I go, my friend, to tend the swine and guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What there thou hast, thy sustenance and mine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charge of what is here belongs to thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be thy first care to save thyself, and watch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see that mischief overtake thee not⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For many are the Achaians plotting it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom Jove destroy ere we become their prey!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake discreet Telemachus in turn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“So be it, father, and, when thou hast supped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Depart, but with the morning come, and bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choice victims for the sacrifice. The care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all things here is with the gods and me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the swineherd sat him down again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his polished seat, and satisfied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His appetite and thirst with food and wine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he departed to his herd, and left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace and the court before it thronged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With revellers, who gave the hour to song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And joined the dance; for evening now was come.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
