<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book V: Departure of Ulysses from Calypso</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Departure of Ulysses from Calypso</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Mercury despatched by Jupiter to Calypso with a message commanding her to send away Ulysses⁠—A raft constructed by Ulysses⁠—His departure on the raft⁠—A storm raised by Neptune, and the raft destroyed⁠—Escape of Ulysses from the tempest, and his landing on the isle of Scheria, inhabited by the Phaeacians.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Aurora, rising from her couch beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The famed Tithonus, brought the light of day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To men and to immortals. Then the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to their seats in council. With them came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High-thundering Jupiter, amongst them all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mightiest. Pallas, mindful of the past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake of Ulysses and his many woes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grieved that he still was with the island nymph:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O father Jove, and all ye blessed ones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who live forever! let not sceptred king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Henceforth be gracious, mild, and merciful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And righteous; rather be he deaf to prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prone to deeds of wrong, since no one now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembers the divine Ulysses more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the people over whom he ruled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Benignly, like a father. Still he lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weighed down by many sorrows, in the isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dwelling of Calypso, who so long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Constrains his stay. To his dear native land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Depart he cannot; ship arrayed with oars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seamen has he none, to bear him o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The breast of the broad ocean. Nay, even now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against his well-beloved son a plot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>is laid, to slay him as he journeys home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Pylos the divine, and from the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of famous Sparta, whither he had gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gather tidings of his father’s fate.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then answered her the Ruler of the storms:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My child, what words are these that pass thy lips?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not thy long-determined counsel this⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in good time Ulysses should return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be avenged? Guide, then, Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wisely⁠—for so thou canst⁠—that, all unharmed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He reach his native land, and, in their barques,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Homeward the suitor-train retrace their way.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and turned to Hermes, his dear son:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hermes⁠—for thou in this my messenger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art, as in all things⁠—to the bright-haired nymph</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make known my steadfast purpose⁠—the return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of suffering Ulysses. Neither gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor men shall guide his voyage. On a raft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made firm with bands, he shall depart and reach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After long hardships, on the twentieth day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fertile shore of Scheria, on whose isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwell the Phaeacians, kinsmen of the gods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They like a god shall honor him, and thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Send him to his loved country in a ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With ample gifts of brass and gold, and store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of raiment⁠—wealth like which he ne’er had brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From conquered Ilion, had he reached his home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safely, with all his portion of the spoil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So is it preordained that he behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friends again, and stand once more within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His high-roofed palace, on his native soil.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the herald Argicide obeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hastily beneath his feet he bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair, ambrosial golden sandals, worn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear him over ocean like the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er the boundless land. His wand he took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewith he softly seals the eyes of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And opens them at will from sleep. With this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hand, the mighty Argus-queller flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, lighting on Pieria, from the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunged downward to the deep, and skimmed its face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like hovering seamew, that on the broad gulfs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the unfruitful ocean seeks her prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And often dips her pinions in the brine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Hermes flew along the waste of waves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when he reached that island, far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth from the dark-blue ocean-swell he stepped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the sea-beach, walking till he came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the vast cave in which the bright-haired nymph</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made her abode. He found the nymph within;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fire blazed brightly on the hearth, and far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was wafted o’er the isle the fragrant smoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of cloven cedar, burning in the flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cypress-wood. Meanwhile, in her recess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sweetly sang, as busily she threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The golden shuttle through the web she wove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all about the grotto alders grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And poplars, and sweet-smelling cypresses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a green forest, high among whose boughs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Birds of broad wing, wood-owls, and falcons built</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their nests, and crows, with voices sounding far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All haunting for their food the ocean-side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vine, with downy leaves and clustering grapes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crept over all the cavern rock. Four springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured forth their glittering waters in a row,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here and there went wandering side by side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around were meadows of soft green, o’ergrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With violets and parsley. ’Twas a spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where even an immortal might awhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Linger, and gaze with wonder and delight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herald Argus-queller stood, and saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And marvelled; but as soon as he had viewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wonders of the place, he turned his steps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entering the broad-roofed cave. Calypso there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glorious goddess, saw him as he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knew him; for the ever-living gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are to each other known, though one may dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from the rest. Ulysses, large of heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not within. Apart, upon the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sat and sorrowed, where he oft in tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sighs and vain repinings passed the hours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazing with wet eyes on the barren deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, placing Hermes on a shining seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of state, Calypso, glorious goddess, said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou of the golden wand, revered and loved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What, Hermes, brings thee hither? Passing few</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have been thy visits. Make thy pleasure known.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart enjoins me to obey, if aught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou commandest be within my power;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But first accept the offerings due a guest.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The goddess, speaking thus, before him placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A table, where the heaped ambrosia lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mingled the red nectar. Ate and drank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herald Argus-queller, and, refreshed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered the nymph, and made his message known:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Art thou a goddess, and dost ask of me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A god, why came I hither? Yet, since thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Requirest, I will truly tell the cause.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I came unwillingly, at Jove’s command;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For who of choice would traverse the wide waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the salt ocean, with no city near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where men adore the gods with solemn rites</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chosen hecatombs. No god has power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To elude or to resist the purposes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of aegis-bearing Jove. With thee abides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bids me say, the most unhappy man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all who round the city of Priam waged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle through nine years, and, in the tenth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laying it waste, departed for their homes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in their voyage they provoked the wrath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pallas, who called up the furious winds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And angry waves against them. By his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sank all his gallant comrades in the deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him did the winds and waves drive hither. Him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove bids thee send away with speed; for here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must not perish, far from all he loves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So is it preordained that he behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friends again, and stand once more within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His high-roofed palace, on his native soil.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; Calypso, glorious goddess, heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shuddered, and with winged words replied:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ye are unjust, ye gods, and, envious far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond all other beings, cannot bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ever goddess openly should make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mortal man her consort. Thus it was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When once Aurora, rosy-fingered, took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Orion for her husband; ye were stung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid your blissful lives, with envious hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till chaste Diana, of the golden throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote him with silent arrows from her bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slew him in Ortygia. Thus, again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When bright-haired Ceres, swayed by her own heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fields which bore three yearly harvests, met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Iäsion as a lover, this was known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Erelong to Jupiter, who flung from high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A flaming thunderbolt, and laid him dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now ye envy me, that with me dwells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mortal man. I saved him as he clung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone upon his floating keel; for Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had cloven with a bolt of fire from heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His galley in the midst of the black sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all his gallant comrades perished there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him kindly I received; I cherished him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And promised him a life that ne’er should know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decay or death. But since no god has power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To elude or to withstand the purposes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of aegis-bearing Jove, let him depart⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If so the sovereign moves him and commands⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the barren deep. I send him not;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For neither ship arrayed with oars have I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor seamen, o’er the boundless waste of waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear him hence. My counsel I will give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing will I hide that he should know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To place him safely on his native shore.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The herald Argus-queller answered her:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dismiss him thus, and bear in mind the wrath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jove, lest it be kindled against thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having said, the mighty Argicide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Departed; and the nymph, who now had heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The doom of Jove, sought the greathearted man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses. Him she found beside the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seated alone, with eyes from which the tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were never dried; for now no more the nymph</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delighted him; he wasted his sweet life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In yearning for his home. Night after night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He slept constrained within the hollow cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unwilling by the fond; and day by day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sat upon the rocks that edged the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in continual weeping and in sighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vain repinings wore the hours away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazing through tears upon the barren deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glorious goddess stood by him and spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Unhappy! sit no longer sorrowing here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor waste life thus. Lo! I most willingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dismiss thee hence. Rise, hew down trees, and bind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their trunks with brazen clamps into a raft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fasten planks above, a lofty floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it may bear thee o’er the dark-blue deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bread will I put on board, water, and wine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red wine, that cheers the heart⁠—and wrap thee well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In garments, and send after thee the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That safely thou attain thy native shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If so the gods permit thee, who abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the broad heaven above, and better know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By far than I, and far more wisely judge.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the great sufferer, as she spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shuddered, and thus with winged words replied:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Some other purpose than to send me home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is in thy heart, O goddess, bidding me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cross this frightful sea upon a raft⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This perilous sea, where never even ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass with their rapid keels, though Jove bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wind that glads the seaman. Nay, I climb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No raft, against thy wish, unless thou swear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great oath of the gods that thou in this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost meditate no other harm to me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; Calypso, glorious goddess, smiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smoothed his forehead with her hand, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Perverse, and slow to see where guile is not!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How could thy heart permit thee thus to speak?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now bear me witness, Earth, and ye broad Heavens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above us, and ye waters of the Styx</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That flow beneath us, mightiest oath of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And most revered by all the blessed gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I design no other harm to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that I plan for thee, and counsel thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I would do were I in need like thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I bear a juster mind; my bosom holds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pitying heart, and not a heart of steel.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having said, the glorious goddess moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away with hasty steps, and where she trod</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He followed, till they reached the vaulted cave⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goddess and the hero. There he took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seat whence Hermes had just risen. The nymph</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought forth whatever mortals eat and drink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To set before him. She right opposite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To that of great Ulysses took her seat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ambrosia there her maidens laid, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured nectar. Both put forth their hands, and took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ready viands, till at length the calls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hunger and of thirst were satisfied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calypso, glorious goddess, then began:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Son of Laertes, man of many wiles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Highborn Ulysses! thus wilt thou depart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Home to thy native country? Then farewell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, couldst thou know the sufferings Fate ordains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thee ere yet thou landest on its shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wouldst remain to keep this home with me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be immortal, strong as is thy wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see thy wife⁠—a wish that day by day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Possesses thee. I cannot deem myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In face or form less beautiful than she;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For never with immortals can the race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mortal dames in form or face compare.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered her:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bear with me, gracious goddess; well I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thou couldst say. The sage Penelope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In feature and in stature comes not nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee, for she is mortal⁠—deathless thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever young; yet day by day I long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be at home once more, and pine to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hour of my return. Even though some god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smite me on the black ocean, I shall bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stroke, for in my bosom dwells a mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patient of suffering; much have I endured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And much survived, in tempests on the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the battle; let this happen too.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the sun went down; the night came on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the twain withdrew to a recess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep in the vaulted cave, where, side by side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They took their rest. But when the child of Dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aurora, rosy-fingered, looked abroad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses put his vest and mantle on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nymph too, in a robe of silver-white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ample, and delicate, and beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrayed herself, and round about her loins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wound a fair golden girdle, drew a veil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over her head, and planned to send away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Magnanimous Ulysses. She bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heavy axe, of steel and double-edged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well fitted to the hand, the handle wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of olive-wood, firm set and beautiful.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A polished adze she gave him next, and led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The way to a far corner of the isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where lofty trees, alders and poplars, stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And firs that reached the clouds, sapless and dry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long since, and fitter thus to ride the waves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, having shown where grew the tallest trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calypso, glorious goddess, sought her home.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Trees then he felled, and soon the task was done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twenty in all he brought to earth, and squared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their trunks with the sharp steel, and carefully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He smoothed their sides, and wrought them by a line.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calypso, gracious goddess, having brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wimbles, he bored the beams, and, fitting them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together, made them fast with nails and clamps.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when some builder, skilful in his art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frames for a ship of burden the broad keel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such ample breadth Ulysses gave the raft.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the massy beams he reared a deck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And floored it with long planks from end to end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On this a mast he raised, and to the mast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fitted a yard; he shaped a rudder next,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guide the raft along her course, and round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With woven work of willow-boughs he fenced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her sides against the dashings of the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calypso, gracious goddess, brought him store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of canvas, which he fitly shaped to sails,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, rigging her with cords and ropes and stays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaved her with levers into the great deep.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Twas the fourth day. His labors now were done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the fifth the goddess from her isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dismissed him, newly from the bath, arrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In garments given by her, that shed perfumes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A skin of dark red wine she put on board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A larger one of water, and for food</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A basket, stored with viands such as please</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The appetite. A friendly wind and soft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sent before. The great Ulysses spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His canvas joyfully to catch the breeze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sat and guided with nice care the helm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazing with fixed eye on the Pleiades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boötes setting late, and the Great Bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By others called the Wain, which, wheeling round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks ever toward Orion, and alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dips not into the waters of the deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For so Calypso, glorious goddess, bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That on his ocean journey he should keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That constellation ever on his left.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now seventeen days were in the voyage past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the eighteenth shadowy heights appeared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nearest point of the Phaeacian land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lying on the dark ocean like a shield.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But mighty Neptune, coming from among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Ethiopians, saw him. Far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw, from mountain-heights of Solyma,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The voyager, and burned with fiercer wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shook his head, and said within himself:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Strange! now I see the gods have new designs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this Ulysses, formed while I was yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Ethiopia. He draws near the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Phaeacians, where it is decreed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shall o’erpass the boundary of his woes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But first, I think, he will have much to bear.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and round about him called the clouds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roused the ocean⁠—wielding in his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trident⁠—summoned all the hurricanes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the winds, and covered earth and sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once with mists, while from above the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell suddenly. The east wind and the south</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pushed forth at once, with the strong-blowing west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the clear north rolled up his mighty waves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses trembled in his knees and heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus to his great soul, lamenting, said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What will become of me? unhappy man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fear that all the goddess said was true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foretelling what disasters should o’ertake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My voyage ere I reach my native land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now are her words fulfilled. How Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wraps the great heaven in clouds and stirs the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tumult! Wilder grow the hurricanes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the winds, and now my fate is sure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice happy, four times happy, they who fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Troy’s wide field, warring for Atreus’ sons:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, had I met my fate and perished there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That very day on which the Trojan host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the dead Achilles, hurled at me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their brazen javelins, I had then received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Due burial, and great glory with the Greeks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now must I die a miserable death.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus he spake, upon him, from on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A huge and frightful billow broke; it whirled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The raft around, and far from it he fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hands let go the rudder; a fierce rush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the winds together snapped in twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mast; far off the yard and canvas flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the deep; the billow held him long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the waters, and he strove in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly to rise to air from that huge swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ocean, for the garments weighed him down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which fair Calypso gave him. But at length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Emerging, he rejected from his throat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bitter brine that down his forehead streamed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even then, though hopeless with dismay, his thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was on the raft; and, struggling through the waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He seized it, sprang on board, and, seated there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Escaped the threatened death. Still to and fro</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rolling billows drave it. As the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In autumn sweeps the thistles o’er the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clinging together, so the blasts of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither and thither drove it o’er the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the south wind flung it to the north</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To buffet; now the east wind to the west.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ino Leucothea saw him clinging there⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The delicate-footed child of Cadmus, once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mortal, speaking with a mortal voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though now within the ocean gulfs she shares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The honors of the gods. With pity she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld Ulysses struggling thus distressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, rising from the abyss below, in form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cormorant, the sea-nymph took her perch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the well-banded raft, and thus she said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah, luckless man! how hast thou angered thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earthshaking Neptune, that he visits thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With these disasters? Yet he cannot take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although he seek it earnestly, thy life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now do my bidding, for thou seemest wise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laying aside thy garments, let the raft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drift with the winds, while thou, by strength of arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makest thy way in swimming to the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Phaeacians, where thy safety lies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Receive this veil, and bind its heavenly woof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath thy breast, and have no further fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hardship or of danger. But, as soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou shalt touch the island, take it off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turn away thy face, and fling it far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From where thou standest into the black deep.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The goddess gave the veil as thus she spoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the tossing deep went down, in form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cormorant; the black wave covered her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But still Ulysses, mighty sufferer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pondered, and thus to his great soul he said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah me! perhaps some god is planning here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some other fraud against me, bidding me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forsake my raft. I will not yet obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For still far off I see the land in which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis said my refuge lies. This will I do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this seems wisest. While the fastenings last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hold these timbers, I will keep my place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bide the tempest here; but when the waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall dash my raft in pieces, I will swim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For nothing better will remain to do.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As he revolved this purpose in his mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earthshaking Neptune sent a mighty wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Horrid and huge and high, and where he sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It smote him. As a violent wind uplifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dry chaff heaped upon a threshing-floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sends it scattered through the air abroad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So did that wave fling loose the ponderous beams.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To one of these, Ulysses, clinging fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestrode it, like a horseman on his steed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now he took the garments off, bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By fair Calypso, binding round his breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The veil, and forward plunged into the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With palms outspread, prepared to swim. Meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neptune beheld him⁠—Neptune, mighty king⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shook his head, and said within himself:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Go thus, and laden with mischances roam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waters till thou come among the race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cherished by Jupiter, but well I deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt not find thy share of suffering light.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having said he urged his coursers on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their fair-flowing manes, until he came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Aegae, where his glorious palace stands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Pallas, child of Jove, had other thoughts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She stayed the course of every wind beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade them rest, and lulled them into sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But summoned the swift north to break the waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That so Ulysses, the highborn, escaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From death and from the fates, might be the guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Phaeacians⁠—men who love the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two days and nights among the mighty waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He floated, oft his heart foreboding death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the bright-haired Eos had fulfilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The third day’s course, and all the winds were laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And calm was on the watery waste, he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That land was near, as, lifted on the crest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a huge swell, he looked with sharpened sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as a father’s life preserved makes glad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His children’s hearts, when long time he has lain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sick, wrung with pain, and wasting by the power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of some malignant genius, till at length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gracious gods bestow a welcome cure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So welcome to Ulysses was the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of woods and fields. By swimming on he thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To climb and tread the shore; but when he drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So near that one who shouted could be heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From land, the sound of ocean on the rocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to his ear⁠—for there huge breakers roared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spouted fearfully, and all around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was covered with the sea-foam. Haven here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was none for ships, nor sheltering creek, but shores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beetling from high, and crags and walls of rock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses trembled both in knees and heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus to his great soul, lamenting, said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now woe is me! as soon as Jove has shown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I had little hoped to see, the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I through all these waves have ploughed my way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I find no issue from the hoary deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sharp rocks border it, and all around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roar the wild surges; slippery cliffs arise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to deep gulfs, and footing there is none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where I might plant my steps and thus escape.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All effort now were fruitless to resist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty billow hurrying me away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dash me on the pointed rocks. If yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I strive, by swimming further, to descry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some sloping shore or harbor of the isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fear the tempest, lest it hurl me back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavily groaning, to the fishy deep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or huge sea-monster, from the multitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which sovereign Amphitritè feeds, be sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against me by some god⁠—for well I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The power who shakes the shores is wroth with me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While he revolved these doubts within his mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A huge wave hurled him toward the rugged coast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then had his limbs been flayed, and all his bones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broken at once, had not the blue-eyed maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Minerva, prompted him. Borne toward the rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He clutched it instantly with both his hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And panting clung till that huge wave rolled by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so escaped its fury. Back it came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote him once again, and flung him far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seaward. As to the claws of Polypus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plucked from its bed, the pebbles thickly cling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So flakes of skin, from off his powerful hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were left upon the rock. The mighty surge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erwhelmed him; he had perished ere his time⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hapless Ulysses!⁠—but the blue-eyed maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pallas, informed his mind with forecast. Straight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Emerging from the wave that shoreward rolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He swam along the coast and eyed it well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hope of sloping beach or sheltered creek.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when, in swimming, he had reached the mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a soft-flowing river, here appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spot he wished for, smooth, without a rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here was shelter from the wind. He felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The current’s flow, and thus devoutly prayed:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear me, O sovereign power, whoe’er thou art!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee, the long-desired, I come. I seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Escape from Neptune’s threatenings on the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deathless gods respect the prayer of him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who looks to them for help, a fugitive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I am now, when to thy stream I come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to thy knees, from many a hardship past.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O thou that here art ruler, I declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself thy suppliant; be thou merciful.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spoke: the river stayed his current, checked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The billows, smoothed them to a calm, and gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swimmer a safe landing at his mouth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then dropped his knees and sinewy arms at once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unstrung, for faint with struggling was his heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His body was all swol’n; the brine gushed forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From mouth and nostrils; all unnerved he lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathless and speechless; utter weariness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ermastered him. But when he breathed again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his flown senses had returned, he loosed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The veil that Ino gave him from his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the salt flood cast it. A great wave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore it far down the stream; the goddess there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her own hands received it. He, meanwhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withdrawing from the brink, lay down among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The reeds, and kissed the harvest-bearing earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus to his great soul, lamenting, said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah me! what must I suffer more? what yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will happen to me? If by the river’s side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I pass the unfriendly watches of the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cruel cold and dews that steep the bank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May, in this weakness, end me utterly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For chilly blows this river-air at dawn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But should I climb this hill, to sleep within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadowy wood, among thick shrubs, if cold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And weariness allow me, then I fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, while the pleasant slumbers o’er me steal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I may become the prey of savage beasts.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet, as he longer pondered, this seemed best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rose, and sought the wood, and found it near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The water, on a height, o’erlooking far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The region round. Between two shrubs that sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both from one spot he entered⁠—olive-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One wild, one fruitful. The damp-blowing wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne’er pierced their covert; never blazing sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darted his beams within, nor pelting shower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beat through, so closely intertwined they grew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here entering, Ulysses heaped a bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of leaves with his own hands; he made it broad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And high, for thick the leaves had fallen around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two men and three, in that abundant store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might bide the winter storm, though keen the cold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, the great sufferer, on his couch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked and rejoiced, and placed himself within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heaped the leaves high o’er him and around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one who, dwelling in the distant fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without a neighbor near him, hides a brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dark ashes, keeping carefully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seeds of fire alive, lest he, perforce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To light his hearth must bring them from afar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So did Ulysses in that pile of leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bury himself, while Pallas o’er his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured sleep, and closed his lids, that he might take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After his painful toils, the fitting rest.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
