<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 20</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-20" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Last Banquet of the Suitors</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Disorderly conduct of the serving-women⁠—Prayer of Ulysses for a favorable omen⁠—Its fulfillment⁠—Preparations for a feast of the suitors in the palace⁠—The feast⁠—Ulysses insulted by Ctesippus, who is reproved by Telemachus⁠—Strange prodigies observed by Theoclymenus, who leaves the hall.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>The noble chief, Ulysses, in the porch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay down to rest. An undressed bullock’s hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was under him, and over that the skins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sheep, which for the daily sacrifice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaians slew. Eurynome had spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cloak above him. There he lay awake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And meditated how he yet should smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitors down. Meantime, with cries of mirth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laughter, came the women forth to seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitors’ arms. Ulysses, inly moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With anger, pondered whether he should rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And put them all to death, or give their shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A respite for another night, the last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heart raged in his bosom. As a hound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Growls, walking round her whelps, when she beholds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stranger, and is eager for the attack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So growled his heart within him, and so fierce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was his impatience with that shameless crew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He smote his breast, and thus he chid his heart:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Endure it, heart! thou didst bear worse than this.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the grim Cyclops of resistless strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devoured thy brave companions, thou couldst still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endure, till thou by stratagem didst leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cave in which it seemed that thou must die.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus he rebuked his heart, and, growing calm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heart submitted; but the hero tossed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From side to side. As when one turns and turns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stomach of a bullock filled with fat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blood before a fiercely blazing fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wishes it were done, so did the chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shift oft from side to side, while pondering how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lay a strong hand on the multitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shameless suitors.⁠—he but one. and they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many. Meantime Pallas. sliding; down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From heaven, in form a woman, came, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside his bed stood over him, and spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why, most unhappy of the sons of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou still sleepless? This is thine abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here thou hast thy consort and a son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom any man might covet for his own.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Truly, O goddess, all that thou hast said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is rightly spoken. This perplexes me⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to lay hands upon these shameless men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I am only one, and they a throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fill the palace. Yet another thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mightier still⁠—if, by thy aid and Jove’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I slay the suitors, how shall I myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be safe thereafter? Think, I pray, of this.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus in turn the blue-eyed Pallas said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O faint of spirit! in an humbler friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than I am, in a friend of mortal birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And less far-seeing, one might put his trust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I am born a goddess, and protect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy life in every danger. Let me say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plainly say, if fifty armed bands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men should gather round us, eager all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take thy life, thou mightest drive away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unharmed by them, their herds and pampered flocks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But give thyself to sleep. To wake and watch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All night is most unwholesome. Thou shalt find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A happy issue from thy troubles yet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and, shedding slumber on his lids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upward the glorious goddess took her way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to Olympus, when she saw that sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had seized him, making him forget all care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slackening every limb. His faithful wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was still awake, and sat upright and wept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On her soft couch, and after many tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glorious lady prayed to Dian thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Goddess august! Diana, child of Jove!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would that thou wouldst send into my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shaft to take my life, or that a storm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would seize and hurl me through the paths of air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cast me into ocean’s restless streams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As once a storm, descending, swept away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daughters born to Pandarus. The gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had slain their parents, and they dwelt alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As orphans in their palace, nourished there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By blessed Venus with the curds of milk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And honey, and sweet wine, while Juno gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauty and wit beyond all womankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chaste Diana dignity of form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pallas every art that graces life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, as the blessed Venus went to ask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For them, of Jove the Thunderer, on the heights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his Olympian mount, the crowning gift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of happy marriage⁠—for to Jove is known Whatever comes to pass, and what shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fortune, good or ill, of mortal men⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Harpies came meantime, bore off the maids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave them to the hateful sisterhood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Furies as their servants. So may those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who dwell upon Olympus make an end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of me, or fair-haired Dian strike me down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, with the image of Ulysses still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before my mind, I may not seek to please</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of less worth. This evil might be borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By one who weeps all day, and feels at heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A settled sorrow, yet can sleep at night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sleep, when once it weighs the eyelids down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes men unmindful both of good and ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all things else. But me some deity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Visits with fearful dreams. There lay by me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This very night, one like him, as he was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When with his armed men he sailed for Troy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I was glad, for certainly I deemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was a real presence, and no dream.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake. Just then, upon her car of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared the Morn. The great Ulysses heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That voice of lamentation; anxiously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He mused; it seemed to him as if the queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood over him and knew him. Gathering up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In haste the cloak and skins on which he slept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He laid them in the palace on a seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But bore the bull’s hide forth in open air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lifted up his hands and prayed to Jove:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Father Jove, and all the gods! if ye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have led me graciously, o’er land and deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the earth, and, after suffering much,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mine own isle, let one of those who watch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the palace speak some ominous word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grant a sign from thee without these walls.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So prayed he. All-providing Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearkened, and thundered from the clouds around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bright Olympian peaks. Ulysses heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gladness. From a room within the house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which the mills of the king’s household stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A woman, laboring at the quern, gave forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An omen also. There were twelve who toiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In making flour of barley and of wheat⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strength of man. The rest were all asleep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their tasks were done; one only, of less strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than any other there, kept toiling on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She paused a moment, stopped the whirling stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spake these words⁠—a portent for the king:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Father Jove, the king of gods and men!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast just thundered from the starry heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet there is no cloud. To some one here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is a portent. O perform for me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All helpless as I am, this one request!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let now the suitors in this palace take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their last and final pleasant feast to-day⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These men who make my limbs, with constant toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In grinding corn for them, to lose their strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once let them banquet here, and then no more.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake; the omen of the woman’s words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Jove’s loud thunder pleased Ulysses well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now he deemed he should avenge himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the guilty ones. The other maids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that fair palace of Ulysses woke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came together, and upon the hearth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindled a steady fire. Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose from his bed in presence like a god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put on his garments, hung his trenchant sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his shoulder, tied to his fair feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shapely sandals, took his massive spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tipped with sharp brass, and, stopping as he reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The threshold, spake to Eurycleia thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Dear nurse, have ye with honor fed and lodged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dur guest, or have ye suffered him to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lodging where he might, without your care?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Discerning as she is, my mother pays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High honor to the worse among her guests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sends the nobler man unhonored hence.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus the prudent Eurycleia said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My child, blame not thy mother; she deserves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No blame. The stranger sat and drank his wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that he would, and said, when pressed to eat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he desired no more. And when he thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sleep, she bade her maidens spread his couch;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he refused a bed and rugs, like one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inured to misery, and beneath the porch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slept on an undressed bull’s hide and the skins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sheep, and over him we cast a cloak.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake; Telemachus, his spear in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went forth, his fleet dogs following him. He sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The council where the well-greaved Greeks were met.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime the noble Eurycleia, child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ops, Pisenor’s son, bespake the maids:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Come, some of you, at once, and sweep the floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sprinkle it, and on the shapely thrones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread coverings of purple tapestry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let others wipe the tables with a sponge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cleanse the beakers and the double cups,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While others go for water to the fount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bring it quickly, for not long to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitors will be absent from these halls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will come early to the general feast.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake; the handmaids hearkened and obeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And twenty went to the dark well to draw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The water, while the others busily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestirred themselves about the house. Then came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The servants of the chiefs, and set themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neatly to cleave the wood. Then also came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The women from the well. The swineherd last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came with three swine, the fattest of the herd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that fair court he let them feed, and sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, greeting him with courteous words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hast thou, O stranger, found among these Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More reverence? Art thou still their mark of scorn?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O that the gods, Eumaeus, would avenge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The insolence of those who meditate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Violent deeds, and make another’s house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their plotting-place, and feel no touch of shame!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So talked they with each other. Now appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Melanthius, keeper of the goats. He brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goats for the suitors’ banquet; they were choice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond all others. With him also came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two goatherds. In the echoing portico</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bound his goats. He saw Ulvsses there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus accosted him with railing words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Stranger, art thou still here, the palace pest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And begging still, and wilt thou ne’er depart?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We shall not end this quarrel, I perceive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till thou hast tried the flavor of my fist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is not decent to be begging here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Continually; the Greeks have other feasts.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; Ulysses answered not, but shook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head in silence, planning fearful things.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Philoetius now, a master-herdsman, came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for the banquet of the suitors led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heifer that had never yeaned, and goats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fatlings of the flock; they came across</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ferry, brought by those whose office is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear whoever comes from shore to shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bound his animals in the sounding porch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And went and, standing by the swineherd, said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Who, swineherd, is the stranger newly come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this our palace? of what parents born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of what race, and where his native land?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhappy seemingly, yet like a king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In person. Sorrowful must be the lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men who wander to and fro on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When even to kings the gods appoint distress.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and, greeting with his offered hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, said in winged words aloud:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Stranger and father, hail! and mayst thou yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be happy in the years to come at least,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though held in thrall by many sorrows now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet thou, All-father Jove! art most austere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the gods, not sparing even those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who have their birth from thee, but bringing them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To grief and pain. The sweat is on my brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I behold this stranger, and my eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are filled with tears when to my mind comes back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The image of Ulysses, who must now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think, be wandering, clothed in rags like thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the abodes of men, if yet indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lives and sees the sweet light of the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if that he be dead, and in the abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pluto, woe is me for his dear sake!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blameless chief, who when I was a boy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave to me, in the Cephalenian fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charge of all his beeves; and they are now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Innumerable; the broad-fronted race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of cattle never would have multiplied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So largely under other care than mine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now other masters bid me bring my beeves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For their own feasts. They little heed his son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace-heir; as little do they dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vengeance of the gods; they long to share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among them the possessions of the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many years unheard from. But this thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes to my mind again, and yet again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrong were it, while the son is yet alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drive the cattle to a foreign land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where alien men inhabit; yet ’t is worse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stay and tend another’s beeves, and bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This spoil. And long ago would I have fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To some large-minded monarch, since this waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not to be endured, but that I think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still of my suffering lord, and hope that yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He may return and drive the suitors hence.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answering, said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Herdsman, since thou dost seem not ill inclined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor yet unwise, and I perceive in thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A well-discerning mind, I therefore say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pledge my solemn oath⁠—Jove, first of gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be witness, and this hospitable board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hearth of good Ulysses, which has here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received me⁠—while thou art within these halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses will assuredly return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, if thou choose to look, thine eyes shall see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitors slain, who play the master here.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus the master of the herds rejoined:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Stranger, may Jupiter make good thy words!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shalt thou see what strength is in my arm.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Eumaeus also prayed to all the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That now the wise Ulysses might return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So talked they with each other, while apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitors doomed Telemachus to death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plotted how to take his life. Just then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bird⁠—an eagle⁠—on the left flew by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High up; his talons held a timid dove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then Amphinomus bespake the rest:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends, this plan to slay Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must fail. And now repair we to the feast.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake Amphinomus, and to his words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They all gave heed, and hastened to the halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the divine Ulysses, where they laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their cloaks upon the benches and the thrones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slaughtering the choice sheep, and fading goats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And porkers, and a heifer from the herd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roasted the entrails, and distributed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A share to each. Next mingled they the wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the large bowls. The swineherd brought a cup</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To every one. Philcetius, chief among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The servants, gave from shapely canisters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bread to each. Melanthius poured the wine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then putting forth their hands, they all partook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ready banquet. With a wise design,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus near the stone threshold placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, on a shabby seat, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little table, but within the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that strong-pillared pile. He gave him there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part of the entrails, and poured out for him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wine into a cup of gold, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sit here, and drink thy wine among the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the insults and assaults of these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It shall be mine to guard thee. For this house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not the common property of all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses first acquired it, and for me⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you, ye suitors, keep your tongues from taunts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hands from force, lest there be wrath and strife.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the suitors, as they heard him, bit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their pressed lips, wondering at Telemachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who uttered such bold words. Antinoüs then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eupeithes’ son, bespake his fellows thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Harsh as they are, let us, O Greeks, endure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These speeches of Telemachus. He makes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High threats, but had Saturnian Jove allowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We should, ere this, and in these very halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have quieted our loud-tongued orator.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the suitor, but Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heeded him not. Then through the city came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heralds with a hallowed hecatomb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Due to the gods. The long-haired people thronged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shady grove of Phoebus, archer-god.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now when the flesh was roasted and was drawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From off the spits, and each was given his share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They held high festival. The men who served</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The banquet gave Ulysses, where he sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A portion equal to their own, for so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His own dear son Telemachus enjoined.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet did not Pallas cause the haughty crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of suitors to refrain from stinging taunts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That so the spirit of Laertes’ son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might be more deeply wounded. One there was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the suitors, a low-thoughted wretch;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ctesippus was his name, and his abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Samos. Trusting in his father’s wealth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wooed the wife of the long-absent king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses. To his insolent mates he said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear me, ye noble suitors, while I speak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This stranger has received an equal share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As is becoming; for it were not just</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor seemly to pass by, in such a feast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guests, whoe’er they may be, that resort</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this fair mansion of Telemachus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I also will bestow on him a gift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hospitality, and he in turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May give it to the keeper of the bath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or any other of the menial train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That serve the household of Ulysses here.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So speaking, with his strong right hand he flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bullock’s foot, which from a canister</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard by he plucked. Ulysses gently bowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head, and shunned the blow, and grimly smiled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The missile struck the solid wall, and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus rebuked the suitor thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ctesippus, well hast thou escaped with life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not having hit the stranger, who himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrank from the blow; else had I pinned thee through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my sharp spear. Instead of wedding feast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy father would have celebrated here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy funeral rites. Let no man in these halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear himself insolently in my sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereafter, for my reason now is ripe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To know the right from wrong. I was of late</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A child, and now it is enough to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ye should slay our sheep, and drink our wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eat our bread⁠—for what can one man do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against so many? Cease this petty war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wrong and hatred; but if ye desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take my life, ’t is well; ’t were better so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rather would I die by violence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than live to see these most unmanly deeds⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guests driven away, and women-servants hauled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through these fair rooms by brutal wassailers.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ended, and the assembly all sat mute</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Agelaüs spake, Damastor’s son:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends! let no man here with carping words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gainsay what is so rightly said, nor yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insult the stranger more, nor one of those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who serve the household of the godlike chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses in his palace. I would say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This word in kindness to Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to his mother; may it please them both!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet the hope was cherished in your hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wise Ulysses would return, no blame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could fasten on the queen that she remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwedded, and resisted those who came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To woo her in the palace. Better so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had he come home again. Yet now, ’t is clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He comes no more. Go then, Telemachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, sitting by thy mother, bid her wed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noblest of her wooers, and the one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who brings the richest gifts; and thou possess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy father’s wealth in peace, and eat and drink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At will, while she shall find another home.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus discreet Telemachus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay, Agelaüs, for I swear by Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by my father’s sufferings, who has died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or yet is wandering, far from Ithaca,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I do nothing to delay the choice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And marriage of my mother. I consent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she become the wife of whom she list,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And him who offers most. But I should feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great shame to thrust her forth against her will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with unfllial speeches; God forbid!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ended here, and Pallas, as he spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To inextinguishable laughter moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitors. There they sat with wandering minds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They swallowed morsels foul with blood; their eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were filled with tears; their hearts foreboded woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then spake the godlike Theoclymenus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Unhappy men! what may this evil be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That overtakes you? Every brow and face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each one’s lower limbs are wrapped in night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moans arise, and tears are on your cheeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The walls and all the graceful cornices</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the pillars are bedropped with blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The portico is full, these halls are full</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shadows, hastening down to Erebus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the gloom. The sun is blotted out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From heaven, and fearful darkness covers all.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and loud they laughed. Eurymachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Polybus, in answer said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The stranger prattles idly; he is come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From some far land. Conduct him through the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young men, and send him to the market-place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since all things here are darkened to his eyes.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake the godlike Theoclymenus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Eurymachus, from thee I ask no guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I have eyes and ears, and two good feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in my breast a mind as sound as they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the aid of these I mean to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My way without; for clearly I perceive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A coming evil, which no suitor here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will yet escape⁠—no one who, in these halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the great chief, Ulysses, treats with scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fellow-man, and broods o’er guilty plans.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and, hastening from that noble pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to Piraeus, in whose house he found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A welcome. All the suitors, as he went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked at each other, and, the more to vex</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus, kept laughing at his guests.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus an insolent youth among them said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No man had ever a worse set of guests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than thou, Telemachus. For what a wretch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wandering beggar is, who always wants</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bread and wine, and is unfit for work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And has no strength; in truth, a useless load</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the earth he treads. The other guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rises to play the prophet. If thou take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My counsel, which I give thee for thy good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let them at once be put on board a bark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of many oars, and we will send them hence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Sicilians; they will bring a price.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So talked the suitors, but he heeded not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their words, and, looking toward his father, held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His peace, expecting when he would lay hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon that insolent crew. Penelope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sage daughter of Icarius, took her place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right opposite upon a sumptuous seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heard the words of every man who spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the hall. They held that midday feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With laughter⁠—a luxurious feast it was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mirthful; many victims had been slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To furnish forth the tables; but no feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could be more bitter than the later one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To which the goddess and that valiant man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would bid the guilty crew of plotters soon.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
