<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 13: Arrival of Ulysses at Ithaca</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-13" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Arrival of Ulysses at Ithaca</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Departure of Ulysses from the court of Alcinoüs⁠—Arrival of the ship at Ithaca⁠—Ulysses carried on shore by the Phaeacians while asleep, and left⁠—His treasures landed also⁠—The ship, while returning, transformed by Neptune into a rock⁠—Dialogue between Pallas and Ulysses concerning the destruction of the suitors⁠—Concealment of the treasures in a cave⁠—Transformation of Ulysses into an old man.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and all within those shadowy halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were silent; all were held in mute delight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcinoüs then took up the word and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Since thou hast come, Ulysses, as a guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this high pile and to these brazen rooms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So long a sufferer, thou must not depart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon thy homeward way a wanderer still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this let me enjoin on each of you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in this palace drink at our repasts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The choice red wine, and listen to the bard:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already in a polished chest are laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Changes of raiment, works of art in gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And other gifts, which the Phaeacian chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have destined for our guest; now let us each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestow an ample tripod and a vase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we in an assembly of the realm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will see the cost repaid, since otherwise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great would the burden be that each must bear.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So spake Alcinoüs; they approved, and sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their homes to sleep, but when the child of Dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rosy-fingered Morn, appeared, they came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All bringing to the ship their gifts of brass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In honor of the guest. The mighty prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcinoüs, going through the ship, bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The whole beneath the benches, that no one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those who leaned to pull the oar might thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meet harm or hindrance. Then they all went back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the king’s palace, and prepared a feast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The mighty prince Alcinoüs offered up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For them an ox to cloud-compelling Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Saturn, ruler over all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They burned the thighs, and held high festival,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all was mirth. Divine Demodocus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bard, whom all men reverenced, sang to them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime Ulysses often turned to look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the bright Sun, and longed to see him set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So eager was the hero to set sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his homeward way. As when a swain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awaits his evening meal, for whom all day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two dark-brown steers have dragged the solid plough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through fallow grounds, and welcome is the hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sunset, calling him to his repast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wearily he walks with failing knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So welcome to Ulysses did the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of day go down. Then did he hold discourse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the Phaeacians, lovers of the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chiefly with Alcinoüs, speaking thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O monarch most illustrious of thy race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcinoüs, now when ye have duly poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wine to the gods, be pleased to send me hence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In peace, and fare ye well! All that my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could wish have ye provided bounteously⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An escort and rich gifts; and may the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestow their blessing with them! May I meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My blameless wife again, and find my friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prosperous! And ye whom I shall leave behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long may ye make the wives of your young years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And children happy! May the gods vouchsafe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To crown with every virtue you and them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And may no evil light upon your isle!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the assembly all approved his words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade send forth the stranger on his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who spake so nobly. Then the mighty prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcinoüs turned, and to the herald said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now mix the wine, Pontonoüs, in a jar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear a part to all beneath our roof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we with prayers to Father Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May send the stranger to his native land.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; Pontonoüs mingled for the guests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The generous wine, and went with it to each,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who poured it on the ground, from where they sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the dwellers of the ample heaven;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the great Ulysses, rising up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Placed the round goblet in Aretè’s hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus bespake the queen with winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Farewell, O queen, through the long years, till age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And death, which are the lot of all, shall come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now I depart, but mayst thou, here among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy people, and the children of thy love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And King Alcinoüs, lead a happy life!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the high-born chieftain, and withdrew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crossed the threshold. King Alcinoüs sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A herald with him to direct his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the fleet ship and border of the deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aretè also sent her servant-maids⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One bearing a fresh cloak and tunic, one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A coffer nobly wrought, and yet a third</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bread and red wine; and when they reached the ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the sea, the diligent crew received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their burdens, and bestowed within the hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The food and drink, but spread upon the deck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at the stern a mat and linen sheet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That there Ulysses undisturbed might sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He went on board and silently lay down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While all the rowers in due order took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their seats upon the benches. Loosing first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hawser from the perforated rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They bent them to their task, and flung the brine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up from the oar, while on the chieftain’s lids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lighted a sweet and deep and quiet sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most like to death. As, smitten by the lash,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four harnessed stallions spring on high and dart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the plain together; so the prow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose leaping forward, while behind it rolled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A huge dark billow of the roaring sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safely and steadily the galley ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor could a falcon, swiftest of the birds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have kept beside it, with such speed it flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearing a hero who was like the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wisdom, and whose sufferings in the wars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And voyages among the furious waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were great and many, though he slumbered now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In peace, forgetful of misfortunes past.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now when that brightest star, the harbinger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Morning, daughter of the Dawn, arose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The barque had passed the sea, and reached the isle.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A port there is in Ithaca, the haunt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phorcys, Ancient of the Sea. Steep shores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretch inward toward each other, and roll back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty surges which the hoarse winds hurl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against them from the ocean, while within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ships ride without their hawsers when they once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have passed the haven’s mouth. An olive-tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With spreading branches at the farther end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that fair haven stands, and overbrows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pleasant shady grotto of the nymphs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called Naiads. Cups and jars of stone are ranged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within, and bees lay up their honey there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There from their spindles wrought of stone the nymphs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weave their sea-purple robes, which all behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wonder; there are ever-flowing springs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two are the entrances: one toward the north</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By which men enter; but a holier one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks toward the south, nor ever mortal foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May enter there. By that way pass the gods.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They touched the land, for well they knew the spot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The galley, urged so strongly by the arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those who plied the oar, ran up the beach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quite half her length. And then the crew came forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the good ship, and first they lifted out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses with the linen and rich folds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of tapestry, and laid him on the sands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a deep slumber. Then they also took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The presents from the hold, which, as he left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their isle, the princes of Phaeacia gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By counsel of wise Pallas. These they piled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to the olive-tree, without the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That none, in passing, ere Ulysses woke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might do their owner wrong. Then homeward sailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crew; but Neptune, who could not forge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The threats which he had uttered long before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the godlike chief Ulysses, thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought to explore the will of Jupiter:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Father Jove! I shall no more be held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In honor with the gods, since mortal men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people of Phaeacia, though their race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is of my lineage, do not honor me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I meant Ulysses should not reach his home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save with much suffering, though I never thoyght</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hinder his return, for thou hadst given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy promise and thy nod that it should be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet these Phaeacians, in a gallant barque,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have borne him o’er the deep, and while he slept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have laid him down in Ithaca, and given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large gifts, abundant store of brass and gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And woven work, more than he could have brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From captured Ilium, if he had returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safely, with all his portion of the spoil.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then cloud-compelling Jupiter replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Earth-shaker, ruler of a mighty realm!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What hast thou said? The gods deny thee not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Due honor; perilous it were for them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To show contempt for one who stands in age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And might above them all. But if among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons of men be one who puts such trust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his own strength as not to honor thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do as seems good to thee, and as thou wilt.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Promptly the god who shakes the shores replied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What thou dost bid me I would do at once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that I fear and would avoid thy wrath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would destroy that fair Phaeacian barque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In its return across the misty sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From bearing home Ulysses, that no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May the Phaeacians lend an escort thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wandering men, and I would also cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lofty mount to rise and hide their town.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake again the Cloud-compeller Jove:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thus were it best, my brother: when the crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of citizens already see the ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approaching, then transform it to a rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In semblance of a galley, that they all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May gaze in wonder; thus wilt thou have caused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lofty mount to stand before their town.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This when the shaker of the shores had heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He flew to Scheria, the Phaeacian isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stood, until that galley, having crossed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea, came swiftly scudding. He drew near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote it with his open palm, and made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ship a rock, fast rooted in the bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the deep sea, and then he went his way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then winged words were spoken in that throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Phaeacians, wielders of long oars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And far renowned in feats of seamanship.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, looking on each other, thus they said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ha! what has stayed our good ship on the sea?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This moment we beheld her hastening home.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’T was thus they talked, unweeting of the cause.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But then Alcinoüs to the assembly said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yes! now I call to mind the ancient words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of prophecy⁠—my father’s⁠—who was wont</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To say that Neptune sorely is displeased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we should give to every man who comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe escort to his home. In coming times⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such was my father’s prophecy⁠—the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would yet destroy a well-appointed barque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Phaeacians on the misty deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning from an escort, and would cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lofty mount to stand before our town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So prophesied the aged man; his words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are here fulfilled. Now do as I appoint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let us all obey. Henceforth refrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From bearing to their homes the strangers thrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon our coast; and let us sacrifice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Neptune twelve choice bullocks of the herd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he may pity us, nor hide our town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a huge mountain from the sight of men.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and they were awed and straightway brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bullocks for the sacrifice. So prayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sovereign Neptune the Phaeacian chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And princes, standing round the altar-fires.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now woke the great Ulysses from his sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his own land, and yet he knew it not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long had he been away, and Pallas now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goddess-child of Jove, had cast a mist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around him, that he might not yet be known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To others, and that she might tell him first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What he should learn; nor even might his wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor friends, nor people, know of his return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere he avenged upon the suitor crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wrongs, and therefore all things wore to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another look⁠—the footways stretching far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bights where ships were moored, the towering rocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spreading trees. He rose and stood upright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gazed upon his native coast and wept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote his thigh, and said in bitter grief:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah me! what region am I in, among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What people? lawless, cruel, and unjust?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or are they hospitable men, who fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods? And where shall I bestow these goods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whither go myself ? Would that they all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were still with the Phaeacians, and that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had found some other great and mighty king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindly to welcome me, and send me back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my own land. I know not where to place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These treasures, and I must not leave them here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest others come and seize them as a spoil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, these Phaeacian chiefs and counsellors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were not, in all things, either wise or just.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gave their word to land me on the coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pleasant Ithaca, and have not kept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their promise. O, may Jove avenge this wrong!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He who protects the suppliant, who beholds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All men with equal eye, and punishes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guilty. Now will I review my stores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And number them again, that I may see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If those who left me here have taken aught.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having said, he numbered all his gifts.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful tripods, caldrons, works of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gorgeous woven raiment; none of these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were wanting. Then he pined to see again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His native isle, and slowly paced the beach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the loud sea, lamenting bitterly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There Pallas came to meet him in the shape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a young shepherd, delicately formed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As are the sons of kings. A mantle lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon her shoulder in rich folds; her feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone in their sandals: in her hand she bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A javelin. As Ulysses saw, his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was glad within him, and he hastened on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus accosted her with winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Fair youth, who art the first whom I have met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon this shore, I bid thee hail, and hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou meetest me with no unkind intent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Protect what thou beholdest here and me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I make my suit to thee as to a god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And come to thy dear knees. And tell, I pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may know the truth, what land is this?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What people? who the dwellers? may it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pleasant isle, or is it but the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fruitful mainland shelving to the sea?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the goddess, blue-eyed Pallas, said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of simple mind art thou, unless perchance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou comest from afar, if thou dost ask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What country this may be. It is not quite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A nameless region; many know it well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those who dwell beneath the rising sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those, behind, in Evening’s dusky realm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rugged it is, and suited ill to steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet barren it is not, though level grounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are none within its borders. It is rich</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In corn and wine, for seasonable rains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dews refresh its soil. Large flocks of goats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And herds of beeves are pastured here; all kinds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of trees are in its forests, and its springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are never dry. The fame of Ithaca,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stranger, has travelled to the Trojan coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though that, I hear, lies far away from Greece.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake; Ulysses, the great sufferer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoiced to be in his own land, whose name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pallas, the child of aegis-bearing Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had just now uttered. Then with winged words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spake, but not the truth; his artful speech</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put that aside, for ever in his breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The power of shrewd invention was awake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“In the broad fields of Crete, that lie far off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the sea, I heard of Ithaca,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To which I now am come with these my goods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I left as many for my sons and fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I had slain Orsilochus, the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of foot, the dear son of Idomeneus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who overcame by swiftness in the race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foremost runners in the realm of Crete.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sought to rob me wholly of my share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Trojan spoil, for which I had endured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hardships in war with heroes, and at sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the angry waves. The cause was this:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would not in the siege of Troy submit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To serve his father, but, apart from him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I led a troop, companions of my own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youth returning from the fields I met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote him with the spear⁠—for near the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I lay in ambush with a single friend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A night exceeding dark was in the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No human eye beheld, nor did he know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who took his life. When I had slain him thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the sharp spear I hastened to a ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Phoenicians, and besought their aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave them large reward, and bade them steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Pylos, bearing me, and leave me there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or where the Epeians hold the hallowed coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Elis. But the force of adverse winds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drove them unwilling thence; they meant no fraud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We wandered hither, just at night we came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rowing hard, the seamen brought their ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the port. No word was said of food,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though great our need. All disembarked in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lay upon the shore. Deep was the sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That stole upon my weary limbs. The men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took from the hold my goods, and, bearing them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where I slumbered on the sand, set sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For populous Sidonia, leaving me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here quite alone with sorrow in my heart.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the blue-eyed goddess, Pallas, smiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And touched the chief caressingly. She seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A beautiful and stately woman now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as are skilled in works of rare device,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus she said to him in winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Full shrewd were he, a master of deceit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who should surpass thee in the ways of craft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even though he were a god⁠—thou unabashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prompt with shifts, and measureless in wiles!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou canst not even in thine own land refrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From artful figments and misleading words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou hast practised from thy birth. But now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak we of other matters, for we both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are skilled in stratagem. Thou art the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of living men in counsel and in speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I am famed for foresight and for craft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the immortals. Dost thou not yet know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pallas Athenè, child of Jove, whose aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is present to defend thee in all time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of peril, and but lately gained for thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The favor of the whole Phaeacian race?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hither am I come to frame for thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise counsels, and to hide away the stores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Given by the opulent Phaeacian chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At thy departure. I shall also tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What thou must yet endure beneath the roof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thine own palace, by the will of fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet bear it bravely, since thou must, nor speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To any man or woman of thyself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of thy wandering hither, but submit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To many things that grieve thee, silently,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear indignities from violent men.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, thus rejoined:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O goddess, it is hard for mortal man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To know thee when he meets thee, though his sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be of the sharpest, for thou puttest on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At pleasure any form. Yet this I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou wert kind to me when we, the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greece, were warring in the realm of Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when we had o’erihrown the lofty town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam, and embarked, and when some god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had scattered the Achaians, after that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daughter of Jove, I never saw thee more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never perceived thee entering my barque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And guarding me from danger⁠—but I roamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever from place to place, my heart weighed down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By sorrow, till the gods delivered me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And till thy counsels in the opulent realm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Phaeacians brought my courage back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou thyself didst guide me to the town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now in thy great father’s name I pray⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For yet I cannot ^think that I am come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pleasant Ithaca, but have been thrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon some other coast, and fear that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art jesting with me, and hast spoken thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to deceive me⁠—tell me, is it true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I am in my own beloved land?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the goddess, blue-eyed Pallas, said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Such ever are thy thoughts, and therefore I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must not forsake thee in thy need. I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How prompt thy speech, how quick thy thought, how shrewd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy judgment. If another man had come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From such long wanderings, he had flown at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delighted to his children and his wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his own home. But thou desirest not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ask or hear of them till thou hast put</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy consort to the trial of her truth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her who now sits within thy halls and waits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain for thee, and in perpetual grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And weeping wears her nights and days away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never doubted⁠—well, in truth, I knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou, with all thy comrades lost, wouldst reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy country, but I dreaded to withstand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father’s brother Neptune, who was wroth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fiercely wroth, for that thou hadst deprived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His well-beloved son of sight. But now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attend, and I will show thee Ithaca</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By certain tokens; mark them and believe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The port of Phorcys, Ancient of the Deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is here; and there the spreading olive-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just at the haven’s head; and, close beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cool dark grotto, sacred to the nymphs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called Naiads⁠—a wide-vaulted cave where once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou earnest oft with chosen hecatombs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An offering to the nymphs⁠—and here thou seest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mountain Neritus with all his woods.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the goddess, and dispersed the mist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the scene appeared. Ulysses saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well pleased, rejoicing in his own dear land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, stooping, kissed the bountiful earth, and raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hands, and thus addressed the nymphs in prayer:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nymphs, Naiads, born to Jove, I did not hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be with you again. With cheerful prayers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I now salute you. We shall bring you soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our offerings, as of yore, if graciously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove’s daughter, huntress-queen, shall grant me yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To live, and bless my well-beloved son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the goddess, blue-eyed Pallas, said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Be of good cheer, and let no anxious thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disturb thy mind. Let us bestir ourselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hide away the treasures thou hast brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within this hallowed grot in some recess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where they may lie in safety; afterward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will we take counsel what should next be done.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The goddess said these words, and took her way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the shadowy cavern, spying out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its hiding-places; while Ulysses brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The treasures thither in his arms⁠—the gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The enduring brass, the raiment nobly wrought⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which the Phaeacians gave him. These they laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together in due order; Pallas then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daughter of the Aegis-bearer Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Closed up the opening with a massive rock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, sitting by the sacred olive-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They plotted to destroy the haughty crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of suitors, and the blue-eyed Pallas said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O nobly born, and versed in many wiles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Laertes! now the hour is come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To think how thou shalt lay avenging hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the shameless crew who, in thy house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For three years past have made themselves its lords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wooed thy noble wife and brought her gifts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, pining still for thy return, she gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hopes to each suitor, and by messages</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made promises to all, though cherishing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A different purpose in her secret heart.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered her:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ah me, I should have perished utterly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By such an evil fate as overtook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides Agamemnon, in the halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my own palace, but for thee, whose words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O goddess, have revealed what I should know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now counsel me how I may be avenged.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be ever by my side, and strengthen me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With courage, as thou didst when we o’erthrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The towery crest of Ilium. Would thou wert</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still my ally, as then! I would engage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O blue-eyed Pallas, with three hundred foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou, dread goddess, wouldst but counsel me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the blue-eyed Pallas spake again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I will be present with thee. When we once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begin the work, thou shalt not leave my sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a haughty suitor with his blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brains shall stain thy spacious palace floor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now will I change thine aspect, so that none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall know thee. I will wither thy fair skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it shall hang on crooked limbs; thy locks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of auburn I will cause to fall away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round thee fling a cloak which all shall see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With loathing. I will make thy lustrous eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dull to the sight, and thus shalt thou appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A squalid wretch to all the suitor train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to thy wife, and to the son whom thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst leave within thy palace. Then at first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repair thou to the herdsman, him who keeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy swine; for he is loyal, and he loves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy son and the discreet Penelope.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There wilt thou find him as he tends his swine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That find their pasturage beside the rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Corax, and by Arethusa’s fount.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On nourishing acorns they are fed, and drink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dark clear water, whence the flesh of swine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is fattened. There remain, and carefully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inquire of all that thou wouldst know, while I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taking my way to Sparta, the abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lovely women, call Telemachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy son, Ulysses, who hath visited</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Menelaus in his broad domain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To learn if haply thou art living yet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered her:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why didst not thou, to whom all things are known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell him concerning me? Must he too roam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And suffer on the barren deep, and leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To others his estates, to be their spoil?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the blue-eyed goddess spake again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let not that thought distress thee. It was I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sent him thither, that he might deserve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The praise of men. No evil meets him there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in the halls of Atreus’ son he sits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe mid the abounding luxuries. ’T is true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That even now the suitors lie in wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their black ship, to slay him ere he reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His native land; but that will hardly be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the earth shall cover many a one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the proud suitors who consume thy wealth.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Pallas spake, and touched him with her wand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And caused the blooming skin to shrivel up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his slow limbs, and the fair hair to fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with an old man’s wrinkles covered all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His frame, and dimmed his lately glorious eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another garb she gave⁠—a squalid vest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ragged, dirty cloak, all stained with smoke;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over all the huge hide of a stag,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From which the hair was worn. A staff, beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She gave, and shabby scrip with many a rent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tied with a twisted thong. This said and done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They parted; and the goddess flew to seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus in Sparta’s sacred town.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
