<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 14: Meeting of Ulysses and Eumaeus</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-14" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Meeting of Ulysses and Eumaeus</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Hospitable reception by Eumaeus of Ulysses in the disguise of a beggar⁠—His feigned accouut of himself⁠—His promise that Ulysses shall return⁠—Supper in the lodge of Eumaeus⁠—Stratagem of Ulysses to procure a cloak for the night.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Then from the haven up the rugged path</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses went among the woody heights.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sought the spot where Pallas bade him meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble swineherd, who of all that served</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great Ulysses chiefly had in charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring the day’s supplies. He found him there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seated beneath the portico, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His airy lodge, that might be seen from far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well built and spacious, standing by itself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eumaeus, while his lord was far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had built it, though not bidden by the queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor old Laertes, with the stones he drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From quarries thither. Round it he had set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hedge of thorns, encircling these with stakes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close set and many, cloven from the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of oak. Within that circuit he had made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twelve sties, beside each other, for the swine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lie in. Fifty wallowed in each sty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All females; there they littered. But the males</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were fewer, and were kept without; and these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitor train made fewer every day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeding upon them, for Eumaeus sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Always the best of all his fatling herd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These numbered twice nine score. Beside them slept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four mastiffs, which the master swineherd fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Savage as wolves. Eumaeus to his feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was fitting sandals, which he carved and shaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a stained ox-hide, while the other hinds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were gone on different errands⁠—three to drive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herds of swine⁠—a fourth was sent to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fatling to the city, that the crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of arrogant suitors, having offered him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sacrifice, might feast upon his flesh.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The loud-mouthed dogs that saw Ulysses come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran toward him, fiercely baying. He sat down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once, through caution, letting fall his staff</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the ground, and would have suffered there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unseemly harm, within his own domain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But then the swineherd, following with quick steps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed through the vestibule, and dropped the hide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He chid the dogs and, pelting them with stones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drave them asunder, and addressed the king:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O aged man, the mastiffs of the lodge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had almost torn thee, and thou wouldst have cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bitter reproach upon me. Other griefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And miseries the gods have made my lot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here sorrowfully sitting I lament</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A godlike master, and for others tend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fading swine; while, haply hungering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For bread, he wanders among alien men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In other kingdoms, if indeed he lives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looks upon the sun. But follow me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And come into the house, that there, refreshed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With food and wine, old man, thou mayst declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence thou dost come and what thou hast endured.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So the good swineherd spake, and led the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the lodge, and bade his guest sit down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid thick rushes for his seat, and spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On these a wild goat’s shaggy hide to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A soft and ample couch. Rejoiced to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So kind a welcome, thus Ulysses spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“May Jupiter and all the deathless gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestow on thee, my host, in recompense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this kind welcome, all thy heart’s desire!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then, Eumaeus, thou didst answer thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My guest, it were not right to treat with scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stranger, though he were of humbler sort</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than thou, for strangers and the poor are sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Jove; our gifts are small, though gladly given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it must ever be with those who serve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young masters, whom they fear. The gods themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prevent, no doubt, the safe return of him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who loved me much, and would ere this have given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What a kind lord is wont to give his hind⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A house, a croft, the wife whom he has wooed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rewarding faithful services which God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath prospered, as he here hath prospered mine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus would my master, had he here grown old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have recompensed my toils; but he is dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O that the house of Helen, for whose sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many fell, had perished utterly!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he went forth at Agamemnon’s call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honoring the summons, and on Ilium’s coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Famed for its coursers, fought the sons of Troy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and girt his tunic round his loins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hastened to the sties in which the herds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of swine were lying. Thence he took out two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slaughtered them, and singed them, sliced the flesh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fixed it upon spits, and, when the whole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was roasted, brought and placed it reeking hot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still on the spits and sprinkled with white meal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before Ulysses. Then he mingled wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of delicate flavors in a wooden bowl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And opposite Ulysses sat him down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus with kindly words bespake his guest:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Feast, stranger, on these porkers. We who serve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May feed on them; it is the suitor train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That banquet on the fatted swine⁠—the men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who neither fear heaven’s anger nor are moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By pity. The great gods are never pleased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With violent deeds; they honor equity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And justice. Even those who land as foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spoilers upon foreign shores, and bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away much plunder by the will of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning homeward with their laden barques,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feel, brooding heavily upon their minds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fear of vengeance. But these suitors know⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For haply they have heard some god declare⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he, the king, is dead; they neither make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their suit with decency, nor will withdraw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To their own homes, but at their ease devour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His substance with large waste, and never spare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the days and nights which Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives to mankind is none when they require</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A single victim only, or but two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sacrifice, and lavishly they drain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wine-jars. Once large revenues were his.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No hero on the dark-soiled continent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor in the isle of Ithaca possessed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such wealth as he, nor even twenty men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together. Hear me while I give the amount.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twelve herds of kine that on the mainland graze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are his, as many flocks of sheep, of swine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As many droves; as many flocks of goats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are tended there by strangers, and by hinds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His servants. Here moreover, in the fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond us, graze eleven numerous flocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of goats, attended by his trusty men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each one of whom brings daily home a goat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The finest of the fatlings. I meantime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am keeper of these swine, and from the drove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I choose and to the palace send the best.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the swineherd, while Ulysses ate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flesh with eager appetite, and drank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wine in silence, meditating woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the suitors. When the meal was o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he was strengthened by the food, his host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled up with wine the cup from which he drank.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave it to Ulysses, who, well pleased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received it, and with winged words replied:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What rich and mighty chief was he, my friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of whom thou speakest, and who purchased thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou sayest that he died to swell the fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Agamemnon. Tell his name, for I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perchance know somewhat of him. Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the great gods know whether I have seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man, and have some tidings for thy ear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I have wandered over many lands.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then again the noble swineherd spake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O aged man, no wanderer who should bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>News of Ulysses e’er would win his wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And son to heed the tale. For roving men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In need of hospitality, are prone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To falsehood, and will never speak the truth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vagabond who comes to Ithaca</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goes straightway to my mistress with his lies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindly she welcomes him, and cherishes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And questions him, while tears abundantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall from her lids⁠—such tears as women shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose lords have perished in a distant land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou too, old man, perchance, couldst readily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frame a like fable, if someone would give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A change of raiment for thy news⁠—a cloak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tunic. But the dogs and fowls of air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have doubtless fed upon the frame from which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The life has passed, and torn from off his bones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The skin, or fishes of the deep have preyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon it, and his bones upon the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lie whelmed in sand. So is he lost to us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sorrow is the lot of all his friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine most of all; for nowhere shall I find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So kind a master, though I were to come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into my father’s and my mother’s house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where I was born and reared. Nor do I pine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So much to look on them with my own eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in my place of birth, as I lament</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses lost. Though he be far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet must I ever speak, O stranger guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His name with reverence, for exceedingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He loved me and most kindly cared for me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though he is to be with us no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hold him as an elder brother still.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the great sufferer, thus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Since then, my friend, thou dost not say nor think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he will come again, nor wilt believe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My words, I now repeat, but with an oath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses will return. Let this reward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be given for my good news: the very hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he once more is in his house, bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On me a comely change of raiment⁠—cloak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tunic⁠—nor will I accept the gift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though great my need, until he comes again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For as the gates of hell do I detest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man who, tempted by his poverty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deceives with lying words. Now Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear witness, and this hospitable board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hearth of good Ulysses where I sit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all which I foretell will come to pass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This very year Ulysses will return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, when this month goes out, and as the next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is entering, will be here in his domain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be avenged on those, whoe’er they be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That dare insult his wife and noble son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then, Eumaeus, thou didst answer thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Old man, I shall not give thee that reward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For never will Ulysses come again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his own palace. Drink thy wine in peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let us give our thoughts to other things.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remind me not of this again; my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grows heavy in my bosom when I hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My honored master named. But leave the oath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unsworn, and may Ulysses come, as we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earnestly wish⁠—I and Penelope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And old Laertes, and the godlike youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus. And then, again, I bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perpetual sorrow for Telemachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My master’s son, to whom the gods had given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A generous growth like that of some young plant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who, I hoped, would prove no less in worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than his own father, and of eminent gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In form and mind. Some god, perchance some man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath caused that mind to lose its equal poise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he is gone to Pylos the divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For tidings of his father. Meanwhile here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arrogant suitors plan to lie in wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him as he returns, that utterly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stock of great Arcesius from our isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May perish, and its name be heard no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak we no more of him, be it his fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fall or flee; but O, may Saturn’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Protect him with his arm! And now, old man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Relate, I pray, thy fortunes; tell me true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may know who thou mayst be, and whence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou earnest, where thy city lies, and who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy parents were, what galley landed thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon our coast, and how the manners</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought thee to Ithaca, and of what race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They claim to be; for I may well suppose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast not come to Ithaca on foot.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered him:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I will tell all and truly. Yet if here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were store of food, and wine for many days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we might feast at ease within thy lodge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While other labored, I should hardly end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a whole year the history of the woes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which I have borne, and of the many toils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which it hath pleased the gods to lay on me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It is my boast that I am of the race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who dwell in spacious Crete, a rich man’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within whose palace many other sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were born and reared, the offspring of his wife;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But me a purchased mother whom he made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His concubine brought forth to him. And yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Castor Hylacides, from whom I sprang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held me in equal favor with the rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he himself was honored like a god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Cretan people, for his wealth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for his prosperous life and gallant sons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But fate and death o’ertook and bore him down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Pluto’s realm, and his magnanimous sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Divided his large riches, casting lots.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Small was the portion they assigned to me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gave a dwelling, but my valor won</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bride, the daughter of a wealthy house⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I was not an idler, nor in war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A coward; but all that is with the past.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou, who seest the stubble now, mayst guess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What was the harvest, ere calamities</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had come so thick upon me. Once did Mars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pallas lend me courage, and the power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To break through ranks of armed men. Whene’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I formed an ambush of the bravest chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And planned destruction to the enemy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My noble spirit never set the fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of death before me; I was ever first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To spring upon the foes, and with my spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To smite them as they turned their steps to flee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such was I once in war; to till the fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never liked, nor yet the household cares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By which illustrious sons are reared. I loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ships well appointed, combats, polished spears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And arrows. Things that others hold in dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were my delight; some god inclined to them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mind⁠—so true it is that different men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoice in different labors. Ere the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greece embarked for Troy, I served in war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine times as leader against foreign foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With troops and galleys under me, and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I prospered; from the mass of spoil I chose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The things that pleased me, and obtained by lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still other treasures. Thus my household grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In riches, and I was revered and great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Cretans. When all-seeing Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decreed the unhappy voyage to the coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy, they made the great Idomeneus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And me commanders of the fleet. No power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had we⁠—the public clamor was so fierce⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To put the charge aside. Nine years we warred⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We sons of Greece⁠—and in the tenth laid waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city of Priam, and embarked for home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our fleets were scattered by the gods. For me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did all-disposing Jupiter ordain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wretched lot. But one short month I dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy among my children, with the wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wedded to me in youth, and my large wealth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then I planned a voyage to the coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Egypt, with a gallant fleet, and men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of godlike valor. I equipped nine ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quickly came the people to embark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Six days on shore my comrades banqueted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a victim for the sacrifice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for the feast I gave; the seventh we sailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Crete’s broad isle before a favoring wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That blew from the clear north, and easily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We floated on as down a stream. No ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was harmed upon its way; in health and ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We sat, the wind and helmsmen guiding us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came upon the fifth day to the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Egypt, watered by its noble streams.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I bade my comrades keep beside our ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the strand, and watch them well. I placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sentries upon the Heights. Yet confident</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their own strength, and rashly giving way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To greed, my comrades ravaged the fair fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Egyptians, slew them, and bore off 325 Their wives and little ones. The rumor reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city soon; the people heard the alarm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came together. With the early morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the great plain was thronged with horse and foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gleamed with brass; while Jove, the Thunderer, sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A deadly fear into our ranks, where none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dared face the foe. On every side was death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Egyptians hewed down many with the sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some they led away alive to toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For them in slavery. To my mind there came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thought, inspired by Jove; yet I could wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I had met my fate, and perished there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Egypt, such have been my sorrows since.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I took the well-wrought helmet from my head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from my shoulders dropped the shield, and flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The javelin from my hand, and went to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The monarch in his chariot, clasped his knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kissed them. He was moved to pity me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spared me. In his car he seated me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bore me weeping home. Though many rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At me with ashen spears, to thrust me through⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For furious was their anger⁠—he forbade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He feared the wrath of Jove, the stranger’s friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And foe of wrong. Seven years I dwelt among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Egyptians, and I gathered in their land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large wealth, for all were liberal of their gifts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with the eighth revolving year there came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shrewd Phoenician, deep in guile, whose craft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had wrought much wrong to many. With smooth words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This man persuaded me to go with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into Phoenicia, where his dwelling lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his possessions. With him I abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For one whole year; and when its months and days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were ended, and another year began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He put me in a ship to cross the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Lybia. He had framed a treacherous plot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By making half the vessel’s cargo mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lure me thither, and to sell me there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a large price. I went on board constrained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with misgivings. Under a clear sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With favoring breezes from the north, we ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the mid sea, beyond the isle of Crete.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When we had left the isle, and saw no land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But only sky and sea, Saturnius bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A black cloud gather o’er our roomy ship.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea grew dark below. On high the God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thundered again and yet again, and sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bolt into our ship, which, as it felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lightning, reeled and shuddered, and was filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sulphur-smoke. The seamen from the deck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell headlong, and were tossed upon the waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like seamews round our galley, which the God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbade them to regain. But Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave to my hands, bewildered as I was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our dark-prowed galley’s mast, unbroken yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That by its aid I might escape. I wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My arms around it, and the raging winds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swept me along. Nine days they bore me on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the tenth dark night a mighty surge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drifted me, as it rolled, upon the coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Thesprotians. There the hero-king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Thesprotians freely sheltered me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fed me; for his well-beloved son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had found me overcome with cold and toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took me by the hand and raised me up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And led me to his father’s house, and gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seemly attire, a tunic and a cloak.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There heard I of Ulysses. Pheidon told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How he received him as a guest and friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When on his homeward voyage. Then he showed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wealth Ulysses gathered, brass and gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And steel divinely wrought. That store might serve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feed, until ten generations pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another household. But the chief himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Pheidon said, was at Dodona then;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he had gone to hear from the tall oak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jupiter the counsel of the God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether to land in opulent Ithaca,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After long years of absence, openly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or in disguise. The monarch took an oath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his own palace, pouring to the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their wine, that even then the ship was launched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the crew ready to attend him home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But me he first dismissed. There was a ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Thesprotians just about to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A voyage to Dulichium, rich in fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wheat. He bade them take me faithfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To King Acastus; but another thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found favor with the crew, a wicked scheme</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To plunge me deeper in calamity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when our ship had sailed away from land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They hastened to prepare me for a life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of slavery. They took my garments off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mantle and cloak, and clothed me in a vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cloak, the very rags which thou dost see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The evening brought them to the pleasant fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ithaca. They bound me in the ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a strong cord, and disembarked, and took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hasty meal upon the ocean-side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Easily did the gods unbind my limbs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wrapped a tattered cloth about my head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, slipping from the polished rudder, brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My bosom to the sea, and spread my hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swam away. I soon had left the crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At distance; then I turned and climbed the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where it was dark with forest, and lay close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within its shelter, while they wandered round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grumbled, but they ventured not to pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the island farther on their search.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They turned, and went on board their roomy barque.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus mightily the gods delivered me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they have brought me to a wise man’s lodge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now I see it is my lot to live.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then thou, Eumaeus, thus didst make reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Unhappy stranger, thou hast deeply moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart in telling all that thou hast borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all thy wanderings. Yet are some things wrong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast not spoken of Ulysses well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should a man like thee invent such tales,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So purposeless? Of one thing I am sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concerning his return⁠—the gods all hate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My master, since they neither caused his death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the great war of Troy, nor, when the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was over, suffered him to die at home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the arms of those who loved him most;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For then would all the Greeks have reared to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A monument, and mighty would have been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heritage of glory for his son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now ingloriously the harpy brood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have torn him. I, apart among my swine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go never to the town, unless, perchance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sage Penelope requires me there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When someone comes with tidings from abroad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then those who sorrow for their absent lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those who waste his substance, both inquire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>News of the king. For me, it suits me not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever to ask for tidings, since the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When an Aetolian with a flattering tale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deceived me. He had slain a man, and came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wandering in many lands to my abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kindly I received him. He had seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, my master with Idomeneus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Cretans, putting in repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His galleys, shattered by a furious storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the summer time he would be here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or in the autumn, bringing ample wealth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his brave comrades with him. Seek not then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O aged sufferer, whom some deity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has guided hither, to amuse my grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fictions that may bring back pleasant thoughts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since not for them I minister to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And love thee, but through reverence for Jove⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stranger’s friend⁠—and pity for thyself.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, spake again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Within thy bosom thou dost bear a heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of slow belief, since not the oath I take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Persuades or even moves thee. Make we now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A covenant, and let the gods who dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon Olympus be our witnesses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That when thy master comes to this abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt bestow a tunic and a cloak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wilt despatch me clothed in seemly garb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence to Dulichium, whither I would go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if he come not as I have foretold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then charge thy servants that they cast me down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a tall rock, that never beggar more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May think to cozen thee with lying tales.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The noble swineherd answered him and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Great would my honor be, and I should gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great praise for worth among the sons of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If, having welcomed thee into my lodge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spread the board for thee, I took thy life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then boldly might I pray to Saturn’s son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But see, the supper hour is come, and soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will my companions be within, and they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will make a liberal banquet ready here.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus did the twain confer. Now came the swine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those who tended them. They penned the herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their enclosure, and a din of cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose as they entered. Then the swineherd called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his companions: “Bring the best of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we will make an offering for the sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one who comes from far and is my guest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we will also feast, for we have toiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long time in tendance of this white-toothed herd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And others waste, unpunished, what we rear.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, and began to cleave the wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the sharp steel; the others chose and brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fatted brawn, and placed him on the hearth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor was the swineherd careless of the rites</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Due to the gods⁠—such was his piety.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From off the white-toothed victim first he sheared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bristles of the forehead, casting them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the flames, and prayed to all the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For wise Ulysses and his safe return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next, with a fragment of the oaken trunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which he had just then cleft, he smote the boar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the life left it. Then they cut its throat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, having singed it, quickly hewed the parts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asunder, while the swineherd took and laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the rich fat, raw portions from the limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sacrifice, and other parts he cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprinkled with flour of meal, into the flames;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rest they duly sliced and fixed on spits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roasted carefully, and drew it back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heaped it on the board. And now arose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swineherd to divide the whole, for well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew the duty of a host. He made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven parts; and one he offered to the Nymphs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hermes, son of Maia, one, and both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With prayer; the rest he set before the guests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, honoring Ulysses, gave to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The white-toothed victim’s ample chine. The king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wise Ulysses, was well pleased, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Eumaeus, be thou ever dear to Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to myself, since with thy benefits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou freely honorest such a one as I.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thou, Eumaeus, madest answer thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Eat, venerable stranger, and enjoy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is before us. At his pleasure God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives or withholds; his power is over all.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and burned to the eternal gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The firstlings, and poured out the dark red wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to Ulysses, spoiler of walled towns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sat beside the table, gave the cup.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime to each Mesaulius brought the bread⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A servant whom Eumaeus, while his lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was far away, had taken for himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without the order of Penelope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or old Laertes; from the Taphian tribe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his own goods he bought him. Now the guests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put forth their hands and shared the ready feast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when their thirst and hunger were appeased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mesaulius took the bread away, and all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Satiate with food and wine, lay down to rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then came the darkness on, without a moon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Jupiter the whole night long sent down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rain, and strong the showery west-wind blew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now to try the swineherd, if with all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His kindly ministrations to his guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He yet would spare to him his cloak, or bid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another do the like, Ulysses spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Eumaeus, hearken thou, and all the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy comrades, while I utter boastful words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wine makes me foolish, it can even cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wise to sing and laugh a silly laugh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dance, and often to the lips it brings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Words that were better left unsaid. But since</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have begun to prattle, I will not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep back my thought. I would I were as young</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the same full strength as when I formed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part of an ambush near the walls of Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The leaders were Ulysses, and the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus, Menelaus, with myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The third, for they desired it. When we reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city and the lofty walls we lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Couched in a marshy spot among the reeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thick-grown shrubs, with all our armor on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas an inclement night, and the north-wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blew bitter chill, the cold snow fell and lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White like hoar frost; ice gathered on our shields.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rest had cloaks and tunics, and they slept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At ease, their shoulders covered with their shields.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I only, when I joined the squadron, left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My cloak unwisely, for I had not thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of such fierce cold. I went but with my shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my embroidered girdle. When the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was in its later watches, and the stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were turning toward their set, I thus bespake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses near me, thrusting in his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My elbow, and he listened readily:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Son of Laertes, nobly born and wise!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, I shall not be long among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The living; for I perish with the cold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have no cloak; some god misled my thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that I brought one garment and no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now I see there is no help for me.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake, and instantly his mind conceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This stratagem⁠—such was his readiness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In council and in battle⁠—and he said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me in a low voice: ‘Be silent now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let no others of the Achaians hear!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leaning on his elbow thus he spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Hear me, my friends: a dream has come from heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into my sleep. Far from our ships we lie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now let someone haste to bear from us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This word to Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherd of the people, that he send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More warriors to this ambush from the fleet.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake, and Thoas instantly arose⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Andraemon’s son⁠—and threw his purple cloak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aside, and hastened toward the fleet. I took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gladly the garment he had left, and lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Morning in her golden chariot came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now I would that I were young again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the vigor of my prime, for then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Someone among the swineherds in the stalls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would find, I think, a cloak for me, through love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And reverence of such a man; but now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They hold me in slight favor, dressed in rags.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus, Eumaeus, thou didst make reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O aged man! we see no cause of blame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy recital, and of all thy words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not one is unbecoming or inapt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt not lack for garments, nor aught else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That any suppliant in his poverty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might hope for at our hands tonight. With morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gird thou thy tatters on again; for here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have not many cloaks, nor many a change</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of raiment⁠—only one for each of us.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the son of our Ulysses comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again, he will provide thee with a cloak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tunic, and will send thee where thou wilt.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake and rose, and made his guest a bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to the hearth, and threw on it the skins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sheep and goats, and there Ulysses lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er whom the swineherd spread a thick large cloak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which he had often worn for a defence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a wild winter storm was in the air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus slept Ulysses with the young men near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A couch within, and distant from his charge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleased not the swineherd, who first armed himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then went forth. Ulysses gladly saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That while he was in distant lands his goods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were watched so faithfully. Eumaeus hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About his sturdy shoulders a sharp sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wrapped a thick cloak round him, tempest-proof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took the hide of a huge pampered goat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a well-pointed javelin for defence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both against dogs and men. So went he forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take his rest where lay the white-toothed swine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herded and slumbering underneath a rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose hollow fenced themfrom the keen north-wind.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
