<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book III: Interview of Telemachus with Nestor</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Interview of Telemachus with Nestor</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Arrival of Telemachus, with Pallas in the shape of Mentor, at Pylos⁠—His interview with Nestor⁠—Nestor’s narrative of his return from Troy⁠—History of the death of Agamemnon and the revenge of Orestes⁠—Departure of Pallas to heaven⁠—Telemachus sent by Nestor with his son Peisistratus to Menelaus at Sparta.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Now from the fair broad bosom of the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the brazen vault of heaven the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose shining for the immortals and for men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the foodful earth. The voyagers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrived at Pylos, nobly built, the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Neleus. There, upon the ocean-side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They found the people offering coal-black steers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dark-haired Neptune. On nine seats they sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Five hundred on each seat; nine steers were slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For each five hundred there. While they performed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rite, and, tasting first the entrails, burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thighs to ocean’s god, the Ithacans</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched land, and, lifting up the good ship’s sail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Furled it and moored the keel, and then stepped out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the shore. Forth from the galley came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus, the goddess guiding him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus to him the blue-eyed Pallas said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Telemachus, there now is no excuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even the least, for shamefaced backwardness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast come hither o’er the deep to ask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For tidings of thy father⁠—what far land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conceals him, what the fate that he has met.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go then at once to Nestor, the renowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In horsemanship, and we shall see what plan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hath in mind for thee. Entreat him there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That frankly he declare it. He will speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No word of falsehood; he is truly wise.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus discreet Telemachus replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Mentor, how shall I approach the chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with what salutation? Little skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have I in courtly phrase, and shame becomes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A youth in questioning an aged man.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Pallas, the blue-eyed goddess, spake again:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“In part thy mind will prompt thy speech; in part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A god will put the words into thy mouth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For well I deem that thou wert neither born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor trained without the favor of the gods.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having said, the blue-eyed Pallas moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hasty pace before, and in her steps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He followed close, until they reached the seats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those assembled Pylians. Nestor there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat with his sons, while his companions stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around him and prepared the feast, and some</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roasted the flesh at fires, and some transfixed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The parts with spits. As they beheld the approach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of strangers they advanced, and took their hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade them sit. Peisistratus, a son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Nestor, came the first of all, and took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hand of each, and placed them at the feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the soft hides that o’er the ocean sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were spread beside his brother Thrasymed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his own father; brought for their repast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Parts of the entrails, poured for them the wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a golden goblet, held it forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his right hand, and with these words bespake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pallas, the child of aegis-bearing Jove:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Pray, stranger, to King Neptune. Ye have chanced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his feast in coming to our coast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after thy libation poured, and prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made to the god, give over to thy friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goblet of choice wine that he may make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Libation also; he, I question not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prays to the gods; we all have need of them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A younger man is he than thou, and seems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In age to be my equal; therefore I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will give the golden goblet first to thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and in the hands of Pallas placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goblet of choice wine. Well pleased was she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With one so just and so discreet⁠—well pleased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That first to her he reached the cup of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus she prayed to Neptune fervently:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear, Neptune, thou who dost embrace the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of thy grace disdain not to bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These blessings on thy suppliants. First of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vouchsafe to Nestor and his sons increase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of glory; on the Pylian people next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestow, for this most sumptuous hecatomb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large recompense; and, lastly, grant to us⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus and me⁠—a safe return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To our own country with the end attained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which brought us hither in our gallant barque.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus did she pray, while she fulfilled the prayer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then she handed to Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair round goblet, and in words like hers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dear son of Ulysses prayed. Meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Pylians, having roasted well the flesh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drawn it from the spits, distributing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To each his portion, held high festival.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the calls of hunger and of thirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were silenced, Nestor, the Gerenian knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began discourse, and thus bespake his guests:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The fitting time is come to ask our guests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who they may be, since now their feast is o’er.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say then, O strangers, who ye are, and whence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye come along the pathway of the deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have ye an errand here, or do ye roam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seas at large, like pirates, braving death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And visiting with ravage foreign states?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then discreet Telemachus replied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boldly⁠—for Pallas strengthened in that hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heart that he might confidently ask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>News of his absent father, and so win</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A worthy fame among the sons of men:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Nestor, son of Neleus, pride of Greece!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou bid’st us tell thee whence we came, and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will faithfully declare it. We are come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Ithaca, beneath the Neritus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And private, and not general, is the cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which I am to speak. I came to ask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concerning my great father, the large-souled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nobly-born Ulysses, who ’tis said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thee, his friend in arms, laid waste the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ilium. We have heard where all the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who warred against the Trojans were cut off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And died sad deaths; his fate alone the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Saturn hath not chosen to reveal⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether he fell on land by hostile hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or while at sea was whelmed beneath the waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Amphitritè. Wherefore to thy knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I come, to ask that thou⁠—if so thou wilt⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Relate the manner of his mournful death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou didst see it with thine eyes, or else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou from other wanderers hast heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its history; for she who brought him forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore him to be unhappy. Think thou not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To soften aught, through tenderness to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy recital, but in faithful words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me the whole, whatever thou hast seen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I conjure thee, that if, in his life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father, great Ulysses, ever gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Promise of word or deed for thee, and kept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His promise, in the realm of Troy, where ye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achaians bore such hardships, that thou now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remember it and speak without disguise.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Nestor the Gerenian knight replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My friend, since thou recallest to my mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sufferings borne by us the sons of Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although of peerless valor, in that land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both when we ranged in ships the darkling sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For booty wheresoe’er Achilles led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when around King Priam’s populous town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We fought, where fell our bravest, know thou then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That there the valiant Ajax lies, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles; there Patroclus, like the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In council; there my well-beloved son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blameless and brave, Antilochus the swift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of foot and warlike⁠—many woes beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We bore, and who of mortal birth could give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their history? Nay, though thou shouldst remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Five years or six, and ask of all the griefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endured by the brave Greeks, thou wouldst depart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outwearied to thy home, ere thou hadst heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The whole. Nine years in harassing the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We passed, beleaguering them and planning wiles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Innumerable. Saturn’s son at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With difficulty seemed to close the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then was there none who might presume to vie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wisdom with Ulysses; that great man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excelled in every kind of stratagem⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy father⁠—if indeed thou be his son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I look on thee amazed; all thy discourse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is just like his, and one would ne’er believe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A younger man could speak so much like him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While we were there, Ulysses and myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In council or assembly never spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On different sides, but with a like intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We thoughtfully consulted how to guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaians in the way we deemed the best;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But after we had overthrown and spoiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Priam’s lofty city, and set sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For home, and by some heavenly power the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were scattered, Jupiter ordained for them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sad return. For all were neither wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor just, and many drew upon themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An evil doom⁠—the fatal wrath of her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue-eyed maid, who claims her birth from Jove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas she who kindled strife between the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus. They had called the Achaians all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To an assembly, not with due regard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To order, at the setting of the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thither came the warriors overpowered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wine. The brother kings set forth the cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that assembly. Menelaus first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade all the Greeks prepare for their return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the great deep. That counsel little pleased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Agamemnon, who desired to keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people longer there, that he might soothe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By sacred hecatombs the fiery wrath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pallas. Fool! who could not see how vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were such persuasion, for the eternal gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are not soon won to change their purposes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They stood disputing thus, with bitter words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till wrangling noisily on different sides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose up the well-armed Greeks. The ensuing night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We rested, but we cherished in our breasts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mutual hate; so for our punishment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had Jove ordained. With early morn we drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our ships to the great deep, and put our goods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And our deep-bosomed women all on board.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet half the host went not, but on the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remained with Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shepherd of the people. All the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embarked, weighed anchor, and sailed swiftly thence;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A deity made smooth the mighty deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when we came to Tenedos we paid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our offerings to the gods and longed for home⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vainly; it pleased not unpropitious Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To favor our return, and once again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sent among us strife. A part of us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led by Ulysses, that sagacious prince,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To please Atrides Agamemnon turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their well-oared galleys back. But I, with all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vessels of the fleet that followed me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fled on my way, perceiving that some god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was meditating evil. With us fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encouraging his men, the warlike son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Tydeus. Fair-haired Menelaus came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Later to us in Lesbos, where we planned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a long voyage, whether we should sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the rugged Chios, toward the isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Psyria, keeping that upon the left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or under Chios pass beside the steeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of windy Mimas. We besought the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he would show a sign, and he complied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade us to Euboea cross the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right in the midst, the sooner to escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All danger. Then the wind blew strong and shrill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swiftly o’er the fishy gulfs our fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew on, and reached Geraestus in the night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, having passed the mighty deep, we made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Neptune offerings of many a thigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of beeves. The fourth day dawned, and now the men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Diomed, the mighty horseman, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Tydeus, stopped at Argos with their fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I went on to Pylos with the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which never, from the moment that the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First sent it o’er the waters, ceased to blow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So, my dear child, I reached my home, nor knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor heard from others who among the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was saved, or who had perished on the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet what I since have heard while here I sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within my palace thou shalt duly learn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor is it what I ought to keep from thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ’Tis said the Myrmidonian spearmen, led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By great Achilles’ famous son, returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happily home; as happily the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Paeas, Philoctetes the renowned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Idomeneus brought also back to Crete</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All his companions who survived the war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea took none of them. But ye have heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though far away, the fate of Atreus’ son⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How he came home, and how Aegisthus laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A plot to slay him, yet on his own head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew heavy punishment⁠—so fortunate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is when he who falls by murder leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A son; for ’twas the monarch’s son who took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vengeance upon the crafty murderer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aegisthus, by whose hand Atrides died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou too, my friend, for thou art large of frame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of a noble presence, be thou brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That men in time to come may give thee praise.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake discreet Telemachus again:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Nestor, son of Neleus, pride of Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ample was his revenge, and far and wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks will spread his fame to be the song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of future times. O might the gods confer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On me an equal power to avenge myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On that importunate, overbearing crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of suitors, who insult me, and devise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evil against me! But the gods deny</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such fortune to my father and to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all that now is left me is to bear.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again spake Nestor the Gerenian knight:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Since thou, my friend, hast spoken words which bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I have heard to mind⁠—the rumor goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in thy palace many suiters wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About thy mother, and in spite of thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do grievous wrong. Now tell me; dost thou yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Willingly, or because the people, swayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By oracles, regard thee as their foe?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy father yet may come again⁠—who knows?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, or with the other Greeks, to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vengeance which these violent deeds deserve.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should blue-eyed Pallas deign to favor thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As once she watched to guard the glorious chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses in the realm of Troy, where we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaians, bore such hardships⁠—for I ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have seen the gods so openly befriend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man as Pallas there befriended him⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should she thus deign to favor thee and keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watch over thee, then haply some of these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will never think of marriage rites again.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake discreet Telemachus again:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O aged man! I cannot think thy words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be fulfilled! for they import too much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they amaze me. What thou sayst I wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May come to pass, but know it cannot be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even though the gods should will it so.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then thus the blue-eyed goddess, Pallas, spake:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Telemachus, what words have passed thy lips?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Easily can a god, whene’er he will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the most distant regions safely keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man; and I would rather reach my home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Securely, after many hardships borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than perish suddenly on my return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Agamemnon perished by the guile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of base Aegisthus and the queen. And yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods themselves have not the power to save</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom most they cherish from the common doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When cruel fate brings on the last long sleep.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Discreet Telemachus made answer thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let us, O Mentor, talk no more of this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though much we grieve; he never will return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his is the black doom of death ordained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the great gods. Now suffer me to ask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Nestor further, since to him are known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond all other men, the rules of right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prudence. He has governed, so men say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three generations, and to me he seems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In aspect like the ever-living gods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Nestor, son of Neleus, truly say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How died the monarch over mighty realms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides Agamemnon? Where was then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brother Menelaus? By what arts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did treacherous Aegisthus plan his death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slay a braver warrior than himself?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not the brother in the Achaian town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Argos? or was he a wanderer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In other lands, which made the murderer bold?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The knight, Gerenian Nestor, answered thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I will tell all and truly. Thou hast guessed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rightly and as it happened. Had the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus, fair-haired Menelaus, come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Troy, and found Aegisthus yet alive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the palace, he had never flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loose earth on his corpse, but dogs and birds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had preyed upon it, lying in the fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from the city, and no woman’s voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the Greeks had raised the wail for him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great was the crime he plotted. We were yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afar, enduring the hard toils of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While he, securely couched in his retreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Argos, famed for steeds, with flattering words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Corrupted Agamemnon’s queen. At first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble Clytemnestra turned away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With horror from the crime; for yet her heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was right, and by her side there stood a bard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With whom Atrides, when he went to Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had left his wife with many an earnest charge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the gods and fate had spread a net</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his destruction, then Aegisthus bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The minstrel to a desert isle, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left him to be devoured by birds of prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And led the queen, as willing as himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his own palace. Many a victim’s thigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the hallowed altars of the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He offered, many a gift of ornaments</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woven or wrought in gold he hung within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their temples, since at length the mighty end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which he hardly dared to hope was gained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We sailed together from the coast of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides, Menelaus, and myself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friends to each other. When the headland height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Athens, hallowed Sunium, met our eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo smote with his still shafts, and slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phrontis, Onetor’s son, who steered the barque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Menelaus, holding in his hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rudder as the galley scudded on⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And skilled was he beyond all other men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guide a vessel when the storm was high.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So there did Menelaus stay his course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though eager to go on, that he might lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friend in earth and pay the funeral rites.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But setting sail again with all his fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the dark-blue sea, all-seeing Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decreed a perilous voyage. He sent forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His shrill-voiced hurricane, and heaped on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mountain waves. There, scattering the barques</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from each other, part he drove to Crete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the Cydonians dwell, beside the stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jardanus. A smooth and pointed rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just on the bounds of Gortys stands amidst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dark-blue deep. The south wind thitherward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweeps a great sea towards Phoestus, and against</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The headland on the left, where that small rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meets and withstands the mighty wave. The ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were driven on this, and scarce the crews escaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With life; the ships were dashed against the crags</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wrecked, save five, and these, with their black prows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were swept toward Egypt by the winds and waves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus adding to his wealth and gathering gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He roamed the ocean in his ships among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men of strange speech. Aegisthus meantime planned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His guilty deeds at home; he slew the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides, and the people took his yoke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven years in rich Mycenae he bore rule,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the eighth, to his destruction, came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobly-born Orestes, just returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Athens, and cut off that man of blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crafty wretch Aegisthus, by whose hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell his illustrious father. Then he bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Argives to the solemn burial-feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his bad mother and the craven wretch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aegisthus. Menelaus, that same day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great in war, arrived, and brought large wealth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So large his galleys could contain no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And thou, my friend, be thou not long away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wandering from home, thy rich possessions left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in thy palace-halls a lawless crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest they devour thy substance, and divide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy goods, and thou have crossed the sea in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet must I counsel and enjoin on thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To visit Menelaus, who has come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just now from lands and nations of strange men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence one could hardly hope for a return;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom once the tempest’s violence had driven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into that great wide sea o’er which the birds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heaven could scarce fly hither in a year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such is its fearful vastness. Go thou now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou with thy ship and friends; or if thou choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The way by land, a car and steeds are here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here my sons to guide thee to the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hallowed Lacedaemon, there to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair-haired Menelaus. Earnestly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beseech of him that he declare the truth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falsely he will not speak, for he is wise.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the sun went down; the darkness crept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the earth, and blue-eyed Pallas said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Most wisely hast thou spoken, ancient man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now cut ye out the tongues, and mingle wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we to Neptune and the other gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May pour libations, and then think of rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now the hour is come; the light is gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor at a feast in honor of the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should we long sit, but in good time withdraw.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Jove’s daughter spake; they hearkened to her words;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heralds came to them, and on their hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured water; boys began to fill the bowls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hard brim, and ministered to each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From left to right. Then threw they to the flames</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victims’ tongues, and, rising, poured on earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wine to the gods; and when that rite was paid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when their thirst was satiate, Pallas rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With nobly-born Telemachus to go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To their good ship, but Nestor still detained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The twain, and chidingly bespake them thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now Jove and all the other gods forbid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ye should go from me to your good ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As from some half-clad wretch, too poor to own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mantles and blankets in whose soft warm folds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He and his guests might sleep; but I have both⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mantles and blankets⁠—beautifully wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never shall the son of that great man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses lie upon a galley’s deck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I am living. After me I hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My sons, who dwell within my palace-halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will duly welcome all who enter here.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus again the blue-eyed Pallas spake:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Well hast thou said, my aged friend, and well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth it become Telemachus to heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy words, for that were best. Let him remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thee and sleep in thine abode, while I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repair to our black ship, encouraging</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crew, and setting them their proper tasks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I am eldest of them all; the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are young men yet, and moved by friendship joined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our enterprise; the peers in age are they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the large-souled Telemachus. Tonight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sleep within the hull of our black ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sail with early morning for the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Cauconians, large of soul, from whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A debt is due me, neither new nor small.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Send meantime from thy palace in a car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with thy son, this youth, and be the steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fleetest and the strongest in thy stalls.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The blue-eyed Pallas, having spoken thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed like an eagle out of sight, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were seized with deep amazement as they saw.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aged monarch, wondering at the sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took by the hand Telemachus, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Of craven temper, and unapt for war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O friend, thou canst not be, since thus the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attend and guide thee in thy youth. And this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the gods whose dwelling is in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can be no other than the spoiler-queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pallas, the child of Jove, who also held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy father in such eminent esteem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Grecians. Deign to favor us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O queen! bestow on me and on my sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on my venerable spouse the meed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of special glory. I will bring to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sacrifice, a broad-horned yearling steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which never man hath tamed or led beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yoke. Her will I bring with gilded horns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lay an offering on thine altar-fires.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such were his words, and Pallas heard the prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then Gerenian Nestor led the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his sons and sons-in-law approached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His glorious palace. When they came within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The monarch’s sumptuous halls, each took his place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In order on the couches and the thrones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man mingled for them as they came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bowl of delicate wine, eleven years old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drawn by the damsel cupbearer, who took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its cover from the jar. The aged chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mingled it in the bowl, and, pouring out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A part to Pallas, offered earnest prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her, who sprang from aegis-bearing Jove.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When due libations had been made, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drank till they wished no more, most went away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each to his home to sleep; but Nestor made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus, the son of the great chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, rest upon a sumptuous couch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the echoing hall, and near to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chief of squadrons, skilled to wield the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peisistratus, who only of his sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abode in Nestor’s halls unwedded yet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While in an inner room of that tall pile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The monarch slumbered on a bed of state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decked for him by the labors of his queen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Soon as the daughter of the dawn appeared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rosy-fingered Morning, Nestor left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bed and went abroad, and took his seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On smooth white stones before his lofty doors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That glistened as with oil, on which before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat Neleus, wise in council as the gods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he had yielded to the will of fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And passed into the Underworld. Now sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gerenian Nestor in his father’s place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guardian of the Greeks. Around his seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just from the chambers of their rest, his sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Echephron, Stratius, and Aretus came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perseus, and Thrasymedes; after these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came brave Peisistratus, the sixth and last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They led Telemachus, the godlike youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And placed him near them. The Gerenian knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nestor began, and thus bespake his sons:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Do quickly what I ask, dear sons, and aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To render Pallas, first of all the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Propitious⁠—Pallas, who has deigned to come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at a solemn feast to manifest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herself to me. Let one of you go forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the fields, and bring a heifer thence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led by the herdsman. To the dark-hulled ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the large-souled Telemachus I bid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another son repair, and bring the crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save only two; and let another call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laërceus hither, skilled to work in gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he may plate with gold the heifer’s horns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let all the rest remain to bid the maids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within prepare a sumptuous feast, and bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seats, wood, and limpid water from the fount.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and all were busy. From the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bullock came; from the swift-sailing barque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came the companions of the gallant youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus; with all his implements⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hammer and anvil, and well-jointed tongs⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With which he wrought, the goldsmith also came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to be present at the sacred rites</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pallas came likewise. Nestor, aged knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought forth the gold; the artisan prepared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The metal, and about the bullock’s horns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wound it, that Pallas might with pleasure see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victim so adorned. Then Stratius grasped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horns, and, aided by Echephron, led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bullock. From his room Aretus brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A laver filled with water in one hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the other hand a canister</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of cakes, while Thrasymedes, great in war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood near with a sharp axe, about to smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victim. Perseus held a vase to catch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blood, while Nestor, aged horseman, took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Water and cakes, and offering first a part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flinging the shorn forelock to the flames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prayed to the goddess Pallas fervently.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now, when they had prayed, and flung the cakes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The large-souled Thrasymedes, Nestor’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck, where he stood, the blow; the bullock’s strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave way. At once the daughters of the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his sons’ wives, and queen Eurydicè⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nestor’s chaste wife, and daughter eldest born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Clymenus, broke forth in shrilly cries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the great earth the sons then lifted up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And held the victim’s head. Peisistratus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chief of squadrons, slew it. When the blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had ceased to flow, and life had left its limbs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They quickly severed joint from joint; they hewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thighs away, and duly covered them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With caul, a double fold, on which they laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raw strips of flesh. The aged monarch burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These over the cleft wood, and poured dark wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon them, while beside him stood the youths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With five-pronged spits; and when the thighs were burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And entrails tasted, all the rest they carved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into small portions and transfixed with spits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roasted, holding the sharp spits in hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime, fair Polycastè, youngest born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Nestor’s daughters, gave Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bath; and after he had bathed she shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rich oil over him, and in a cloak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of noble texture and a tunic robed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prince, who, like a god in presence, left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bath, and took his place where Nestor sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherd of the people. When the youths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had roasted well and from the spits withdrawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flesh, they took their places at the feast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then rose up chosen men, and poured the wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the cups of gold; and when at length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thirst and appetite were both allayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The knight, Gerenian Nestor, thus began:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Rise now, my sons; join to the bright-haired steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My car, and let Telemachus depart.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; they hearkened and obeyed, and straight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yoked the swift horses to the car. Then came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The matron of the household, laying bread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wine within the car, and dainties such</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As make a prince’s fare. Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then climbed into the sumptuous seat. The son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Nestor and the chief of armed bands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peisistratus, climbed also, took his place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside him, grasped the reins, and with the lash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Urged on the coursers. Not unwillingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They darted toward the plain, and left behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lofty Pylos. All that day they shook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yoke on both their necks. The sun went down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The highways lay in darkness when they came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Pherae and the abode of Diocles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Orsilochus, who claimed to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The offspring of Alpheius. They with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found welcome there, and there that night they slept.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when the rosy-fingered Morn appeared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They yoked the horses, climbed the shining car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And issued from the palace gate beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sounding portico. Peisistratus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wielded the lash to urge the coursers on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not unwillingly they flew and reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A land of harvests. Here the travellers found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their journey’s end, so swiftly those fleet steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had borne them on. And now the sun went down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And darkness gathered over all the ways.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
