<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 22: Death of the Suitors</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-22" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Death of the Suitors</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Antinoüs slain by an arrow from the bow of Ulysses, who now declares himself, and begins the slaughter⁠—Arms brought to him and to Eumaeus and Philoetius by Telemachus⁠—Arms brought to the suitors by Melanthius the goatherd.⁠—Appearance of Pallas in the shape of Mentor⁠—Death of all the suitors⁠—Medon and Phemius spared⁠—The unfaithful serving-women hanged.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Then did Ulysses cast his rags aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, leaping to the threshold, took his stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On its broad space, with bow and quiver filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With arrows. At his feet the hero poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winged shafts, and to the suitors called:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“That difficult strife is ended. Now I take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another mark, which no man yet has hit.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now shall I see if I attain my aim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, by the aid of Phoebus, win renown.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and, turning, at Antinoüs aimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bitter shaft⁠—Antinoüs, who just then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had grasped a beautiful two-eared cup of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About to drink the wine. He little thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wounds and death; for who, when banqueting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among his fellows, could suspect that one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone against so many men would dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>However bold, to plan his death, and bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On him the doom of fate? Ulysses struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitor with the arrow at the throat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The point came through the tender neck behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sideways he sank to earth; his hand let fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cup; the dark blood in a thick warm stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gushed from the nostrils of the smitten man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spurned the table with his feet, and spilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The viands; bread and roasted meats were flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lie polluted on the floor. Then rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitors in a tumult, when they saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fallen man; from all their seats they rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throughout the hall, and to the massive walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked eagerly; there hung no buckler there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No sturdy lance for them to wield. They called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to Ulysses with indignant words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Stranger! in evil hour hast thou presumed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To aim at men; and thou shalt henceforth bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part in no other contest. Even now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is thy destruction close to thee. Thy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath slain the noblest youth in Ithaca.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vultures shall devour thy flesh for this.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So each one said; they deemed he had not slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitor wittingly; nor did they see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blind that they were, the doom which in that hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was closing round them all. Then with a frown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wise Ulysses looked on them, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Dogs! ye had thought I never would come back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Ilium’s coast, and therefore ye devoured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My substance here, and offered violence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my maid-servants, and pursued my wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As lovers, while I lived. Ye dreaded not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods who dwell in the great heaven, nor feared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vengeance hereafter from the hands of men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now destruction overhangs you all.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and all were pale with fear, and each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked round for some escape from death. Alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eurymachus found voice, and answered thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If thou indeed be he, the Ithacan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, now returned to thine old home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well hast thou spoken of the many wrongs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Done to thee by the Achaians in thy house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in thy fields. But there the man lies slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who was the cause of all. Antinoüs first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began this course of wrong. Nor were his thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So much of marriage as another aim⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Saturn’s son denied him⁠—to bear rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself o’er those who till the pleasant fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ithaca, first having slain thy son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ambush. But he now has met his fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spare, then, thy people. We will afterward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make due amends in public for the waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in thy palace of the food and wine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For each of us shall bring thee twenty beeves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brass and gold, until thy heart shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Content. Till then we cannot blame thy wrath.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sternly the wise Ulysses frowned, and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Eurymachus, if thou shouldst offer me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that thou hast, thy father’s wealth entire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And add yet other gifts, not even then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would I refrain from bloodshed, ere my hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avenged my wrongs upon the suitor-crew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choose then to fight or flee, whoever hopes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Escape from death and fate; yet none of you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will now, I think, avoid that bitter doom.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. At once their knees and head grew faint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus Eurymachus bespake the rest:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This man, O friends, to his untamable arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will give no rest, but with that bow in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quiver, will send forth from where he stands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His shafts, till he has slain us all. Prepare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For combat then, and draw your swords, and hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tables up against his deadly shafts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rush together at him as one man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drive him from the threshold through the door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, hurrying through the city, let us sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The alarm, and soon he will have shot his last.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and, drawing his keen two-edged sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of brass, sprang toward him with a dreadful cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as the great Ulysses, sending forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An arrow, smote the suitor on the breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the nipple. The swift weapon stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fixed in his liver; to the ground he flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sword, and, reeling giddily around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The table, fell; he brought with him to earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The viands and the double cup, and smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pavement with his forehead heavily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in great agony. With both his feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He struck and shook his throne, and darkness came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over his eyes. Then rushed Amphinomus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the glorious chief, and drew his sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thrust him from the door. Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ertook him, and between his shoulders drove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A brazen lance. Right through his breast it went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he fell headlong, with his forehead dashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the floor. Telemachus drew back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left his long spear in Amphinomus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest, while he drew it forth, some one among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaians might attack him with the sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrust him through or hew him down. In haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He reached his father’s side, and quickly said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now, father, will I bring to thee a shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two javelins, and a helmet wrought of brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well fitted to the temples. I will case</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself in armor, and will also give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arms to the swineherd, and to him who tends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beeves; for men in armor combat best.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And wise Ulysses answered: “Bring them then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quickly, while I yet have arrows here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my defence, lest, when I am alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They drive me from my station at the door.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. Obedient to his father’s word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus was soon within the room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which the glorious arms were laid. He took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four bucklers thence, eight spears, and helmets four</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of brass, each darkened with its horsehair crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bore them forth, and quickly stood again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside his father. But he first encased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His limbs in brass; his followers also put</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their shining armor on, and took their place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the wise Ulysses, eminent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shrewd devices. He, while arrows yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were ready to his hand, with every aim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought down a suitor; side by side they fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the shafts were spent, the archer-king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaned his good bow beside the shining wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against a pillar of the massive pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round his shoulders slung a fourfold shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crowned his martial forehead with a helm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought fairly, with a heavy horsehair crest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That nodded gallantly above, and took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hand the two stout lances tipped with brass.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the strong wall there was a postern door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, near the outer threshold of the pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A passage from it to a narrow lane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Closed with well-fitting doors. Ulysses bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble swineherd take his station there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And guard it well, as now the only way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of entrance. Agelaüs called aloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all his fellows, and bespake them thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Friends! will no one among you all go up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To yonder postern door, and make our plight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Known to the people? Then the alarm would spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this man haply will have shot his last.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Melanthius, keeper of the goats, replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay, noble Agelaüs; ’tis too near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace gate; the entrance of the lane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is narrow, and a single man, if brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against us all might hold it. I will bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arms from the chamber to equip you all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there within, and nowhere else, I deem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses and his son laid up their arms.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having said, the keeper of the goats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Melanthius, climbed the palace stairs, and gained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chamber of Ulysses. Taking thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twelve shields, as many spears, as many helms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of brass, with each its heavy horsehair plume,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came, and gave them to the suitors’ hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then sank the hero’s heart, and his knees shook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he beheld the suitors putting on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their armor, and uplifting their long spears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty task appalled him, and he thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bespake Telemachus with winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Telemachus, some woman here, or else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Melanthius, makes the battle hard for us.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus discreet Telemachus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Father, I erred in this. I was the cause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no one else; I left the solid door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ajar; the spy was shrewder far than I.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, good Eumaeus, shut the chamber door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see if any of the palace-maids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have brought these arms, or if I rightly fix</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guilt upon Melanthius, Dolius’ son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So talked they with each other, while again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Melanthius, stealing toward the chamber, thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring yet other shining weapons thence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble swineherd marked him as he went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quickly drawing near Ulysses said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Son of Laertes! nobly born and wise!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The knave whom we suspect is on his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to thy chamber. Tell me now, I pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plainly, shall I make an end of him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I may prove the stronger man, or bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wretch into thy presence, to endure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vengeance due to all the iniquities</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plotted by him against thee in these halls?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Telemachus and I will keep at bay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitors in this place, however fierce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their onset, while ye two bind fast his hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feet behind his back, and bringing him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the chamber, with the door made fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind you, tie him with a double cord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And draw him up a lofty pillar close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the timbers of the roof, that, swinging there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He may live long and suffer grievous pain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; they hearkened and obeyed, and went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to the chamber unperceived by him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who stood within and searched a nook for arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On each side of the entrance, by its posts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They waited for Melanthius. Soon appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goatherd at the threshold of the room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearing a beautiful helmet in one hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the other a broad ancient shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Defaced by age and mould. Laertes once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero, bore it when a youth, but now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long time it lay unused, with gaping seams.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They sprang and seized the goatherd, dragging him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to the chamber by the hair; and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They cast him, in an agony of fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the floor, and bound his hands and feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a stout cord behind his back, as bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great Ulysses, much-enduring son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of old Laertes. Round him then they looped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A double cord, and swung him up beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lofty pillar, till they brought him near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The timbers of the roof. And then didst thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eumaeus, say to him in jeering words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Melanthius, there mayst thou keep watch all night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a soft bed, a fitting place for thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the Mother of the Dawn shall come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon her golden seat from ocean’s streams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt not fail to see her. Thou mayst then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drive thy goats hither for the suitors’ feast.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They left him in that painful plight, and put</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their armor on, and closed the shining door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And went, and by Ulysses, versed in wiles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood breathing valor. Four were they who stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon that threshold, while their foes within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were many and brave. Then Pallas, child of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew near, like Mentor both in shape and voice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses saw her, and rejoiced and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Come, Mentor, to the aid of one who loves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And has befriended thee, thy peer in age.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus said Ulysses, but believed he spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Pallas, scatterer of hosts. Fierce shouts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came from the suitors in the hall, and first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus Agelaüs railed, Damastor’s son:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Mentor, let not Ulysses wheedle thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To join him, and make war on us, for this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our purpose is, and it will be fulfilled:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When by our hands the father and the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are slain, thou also shalt be put to death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this attempt, and thy own head shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The forfeit. When we shall have taken thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy life with our good weapons, we will seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On all thou hast, on all thy wealth within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy dwelling or without, and, mingling it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the possessions of Ulysses, leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within thy palaces no son of thine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or daughter living, and no virtuous wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thine, abiding here in Ithaca.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and woke new anger in the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pallas, and she chid Ulysses thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ulysses, thou art not, in might of arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And courage, what thou wert when waging war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine years without a pause against the men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy for Helen’s sake, the child of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many didst thou slay in deadly strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Priam’s city, with its spacious streets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was taken through thy counsels. How is it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, coming to thy own possessions here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy own palace, thou dost sadly find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy ancient valor fail thee in the strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the suitors? Now draw near, my friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stand by me, and see what I shall do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And own that Mentor, son of Alcimus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid a press of foes requites thy love.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, but gave not to Ulysses yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The certain victory; for she meant to put</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To further proof the courage and the might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both of Ulysses and his emulous son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the broad palace roof she rose, and sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shape a swallow. Agelaüs now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Damastor’s son, cheered on with gallant words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friends; so also did Amphimedon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eurynomus, and Demoptolemus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polyctor’s son, Peisander, and with these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sagacious Polybus. These six excelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In valor all the suitors who survived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they were fighting for their lives. The bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fleet shafts had smitten down their peers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to his fellows Agelaüs spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends, this man will now be forced to stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fatal hand. See, Mentor leaves his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After much empty boasting, and those four</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are at the entrance gate alone. Now aim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At him with your long spears⁠—not all at once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let six first hurl their weapons, and may Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grant that we strike Ulysses down, and win</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great glory! For the others at his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We care but little, if their leader fail.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; they hearkened. Eagerly they cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their lances. Pallas made their aim to err.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One struck a pillar of the massive pile;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One struck the panelled door; one ashen shaft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavy with metal, rang against the wall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when they had escaped that flight of spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurled from the crowd, the much-enduring man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, thus to his companions said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now is the time, my friends, to send our spears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the suitor-crowd, who, not content</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wrongs already done us, seek our lives.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and, aiming opposite, they cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their spears. The weapon which Ulysses flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slew Demoptolemus; his son struck down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Euryades; the herdsman smote to death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peisander, and the swineherd Elatus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These at one moment fell, and bit the dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the broad floor. Back flew the suitor-crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a recess; and after them the four</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed on, and plucked their weapons from the dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again the suitors threw their spears; again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Pallas cause their aim to err. One struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pillar of the massive pile, and one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The panelled door; another ashen shaft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavy with metal, rang against the wall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet did the weapon of Amphimedon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike lightly on the wrist Telemachus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brass just tore the skin. Ctesippus grazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shoulder of Eumaeus with his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the shield; the spear flew over it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fell to earth. Then they who stood beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sage Ulysses, versed in wiles, once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flung their keen spears. The spoiler of walled towns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, slew Eurydamas; his son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck down Amphimedon; the swineherd took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The life of Polybus; the herdsman smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ctesippus, driving through his breast the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And called to him, and gloried o’er his fall:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O son of Polytherses, prompt to rail!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beware of uttering, in thy foolish pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Big words hereafter; leave it to the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mightier are they than we. See, I repay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hospitable gift of a steer’s foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which once the great Ulysses from thy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received, as he was passing through this hall.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus spake the keeper of the horned herd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime, Ulysses slew Damastor’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his long spear, in combat hand to hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus next smote Evenor’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leiocritus. He sent the brazen spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into his bowels; through his body passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon, and he fell upon his face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His forehead struck the floor. Then Pallas held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On high her fatal aegis. From the roof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She showed it, and their hearts grew wild with fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fled along the hall as flees a herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of kine, when the swift gadfly suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has come among them, and has scattered them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In springtime, when the days are growing long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime, like falcons with curved claws and beaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, coming from the mountain summits, pounce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the smaller birds, and make them fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to the fields among the snares they dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seize and slay, nor can the birds resist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or fly, and at the multitude of prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fowlers’ hearts are glad; so did the four</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smite right and left the suitors hurrying through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace-hall, and fearful moans arose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As heads were smitten by the sword, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pavement swam with blood. Leiodes then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang forward to Ulysses, clasped his knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And supplicated him with winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I come, Ulysses, to thy knees. Respect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spare me. Never have I said or done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the women of thy household, aught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That could be blamed, and I essayed to check</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wrongs of other suitors. Little heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gave my counsels, nor withheld their hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From evil deeds, and therefore have they drawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon themselves an evil fate. But I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who have done nothing⁠—I their soothsayer⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must I too die? Then is there no reward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the sons of men for worthy deeds.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, frowned and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If then, in truth, thou wert as thou dost boast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A soothsayer among these men, thy prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within these palace-walls must oft have been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That far from me might be the blessed day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my return, and that my wife might take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thee her lot, and bring forth sons to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore shalt thou not escape from death.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and seizing with his powerful hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A falchion lying near, which from the grasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Agelaüs fell when he was slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just at the middle of the neck he smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leiodes, while the words were on his lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the head fell, and lay amid the dust.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Phemius, the son of Terpius, skilled in song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone escaped the bitter doom of death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He by constraint had sung among the train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of suitors, and was standing now beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The postern door, and held his sweet-toned lyre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pondered whether he should leave the hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sit before the altar of the great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herceian Jove, where, with Laertes, once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses oft had burned the thighs of beeves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or whether he should fling himself before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, as a suppliant, at his knees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This to his thought seemed wisest⁠—to approach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laertes’ son, and clasp his knees. He placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sweet harp on the floor, between the cup</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And silver-studded seat, and went and clasped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero’s knees, and said in winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I come, Ulysses, to thy knees. Respect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spare me. It will be a grief to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereafter, shouldst thou slay a bard, who sings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For gods and men alike. I taught myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This art; some god has breathed into my mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Songs of all kinds, and I could sing to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to a god. O, seek not then to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My life! Thy own dear son Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will bear me witness that not willingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor for the sake of lucre did I come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sing before the suitors at their feasts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in thy palace, but was forced to come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By numbers and by mightier men than I.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ceased; Telemachus, the mighty, heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus bespake his father at his side:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Refrain; smite not the guiltless with the sword;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be the herald, Medon, also spared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in our palace had the care of me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all my childhood; if he be not slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already by Philoetius, or by him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who tends the swine, or if he have not met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thyself, when thou wert ranging through the hail.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and the sagacious Medon heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As crouching underneath a throne he lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrapped in the skin just taken from a steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hide from the black doom of death. He came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From where he lay, and quickly flung aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The skin, and, springing forward, clasped the knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the young prince, and said in winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Dear youth, behold me here; be merciful;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak to thy father, that he put not forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sword to slay me, eager as he is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For vengeance, and incensed against the men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who haunt these halls to make his wealth a spoil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in their folly hold thyself in scorn.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the sage Ulysses smiled and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Be of good cheer, since this my son protects</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rescues thee. Now mayst thou well perceive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And say to other men, how much more safe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is doing good than evil. Go thou forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of this slaughter to the open court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou and the illustrious bard, and sit ye there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While here within I do what yet I must.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; they moved away and left the hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the altar of almighty Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat looking round them, still in fear of death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime, Ulysses passed with searching look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er all the place, to find if yet remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A single one of all the suitor-crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alive, and skulking from his bitter doom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw that all had fallen in blood and dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many as fishes on the shelving beach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drawn from the hoary deep by those who tend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nets with myriad meshes. Poured abroad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the sand, while panting to return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the salt sea they lie, till the hot sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Takes their life from them; so the suitors lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaped on each other. Then Ulysses took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The word, and thus bespake Telemachus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Go now, Telemachus, and hither call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nurse, Dame Eurycleia. I would say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhat to her that comes into my thought.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the chief. Telemachus obeyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The word, and smote the door, and called the nurse:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Come hither, ancient dame, who hast in charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To oversee the women in their tasks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father calls thee, and would speak with thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; nor flew the word in vain; she flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart the portals of those stately rooms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came in haste. Before her went the prince.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the corpses of the slain they found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, stained with blood, and grimed with dust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a lion, who has just devoured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bullock of the pasture, moves away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A terror to the sight, with breast and cheeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All bathed in blood; so did Ulysses seem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His feet and hands steeped in the blood of men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She, when she saw the corpses and the pools</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of blood, and knew the mighty task complete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was moved to shout for joy. Ulysses checked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her eager zeal, and said in winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Rejoice in spirit, dame, but calm thyself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shout not. To exult aloud o’er those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who lie in death is an unholy thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pleasure of the gods, and their own guilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought death on these; for no respect had they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To any of their fellow-men⁠—the good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or evil⁠—whosoever he might be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That came to them, and thus on their own heads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They drew this fearful fate. Now name to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The women of the palace; let me know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who is disloyal, and who innocent.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then thus the well-beloved nurse replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My son, I will declare the truth. There dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in thy palace fifty serving-maids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom we have taught to work, to comb the fleece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And serve the household. Twelve of these have walked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The way of shame. To me they give no heed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor to Penelope herself. Thy son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has just now grown to manhood, and the queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has never suffered him to rule the maids;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let me now, ascending to her room⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The royal bower⁠—apprise thy wife, to whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some deity has sent the gift of sleep.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wake her not yet, but go and summon all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The women who have wrought these shameful deeds.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the matron through the palace went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seek the women, and to bid them come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile, Ulysses called Telemachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herdsman and the swineherd to his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus commanded them with wingea words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Begin to carry forth the dead, and call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The women to your aid; and next make clean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With water and with thirsty sponges, all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sumptuous thrones and tables. When ye thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have put the hall in order, lead away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The serving-maids, and in the space between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The kitchen vault and solid outer wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smite them with your long swords till they give up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ghost, and lose the memory evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of secret meetings with the suitor-train.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the women came, lamenting loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many tears, and carried forth the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaning upon each other as they went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And placed them underneath the portico</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the walled court. Ulysses gave command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastening their task, as all unwillingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They bore the corpses forth. With water next,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thirsty sponges in their hands, they cleansed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sumptuous thrones and tables. Then the prince,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus, with shovels cleared the floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herdsman and the swineherd aiding him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made the women bear the rubbish forth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now when all within was once again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In seemly order, they led forth the maids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that fair pile into the space between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The kitchen vault and solid outer wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A narrow space from which was no escape,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus discreet Telemachus began:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I will not take away these creatures’ lives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a pure death⁠—these who so long have heaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reproaches on my mother’s head and mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And played the wanton with the suitor-crew.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and made the hawser of a ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fast to a lofty shaft; the other end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wound about the kitchen vault. So high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stretched it that the feet of none who hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On it might touch the ground. As when a flock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of broad-winged thrushes or wild pigeons strike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A net within a thicket, as they seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their perch, and find unwelcome durance there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So hung the women, with their heads a-row,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cords about their necks, that they might die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A miserable death. A little while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And but a little, quivered their loose feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In air. They led Melanthius from the hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through the porch, cut off his nose and ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrenched out the parts of shame, a bloody meal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For dogs, and in their anger from the trunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lopped hands and feet. Then having duly washed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their feet and hands, they came into the hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to Ulysses; they had done their work.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then to the dear nurse Ulysses said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bring sulphur, dame, the cure of noxious air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fire, that I may purge the hall with smoke;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And go, and bid Penelope come down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her attendant women, and command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all the handmaids of the household come.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus in turn Dame Eurycleia spake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Well hast thou said, my son, but suffer me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring thee clothes, a tunic and a cloak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor with those rags on thy broad shoulders stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thine own palace; it becomes thee not.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“First let a fire be kindled in this hall.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and Eurycleia, the dear nurse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obeyed, and brought the sulphur and the fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses steeped in smoke the royal pile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both hall and court. The matron, passing through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stately palace of Ulysses, climbed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stair to find and summon all the maids.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forth they issued, bearing in their hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Torches, and, crowding round Ulysses, gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glad greeting, seized his hands, embraced him, kissed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hands and brow and shoulders. The desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To weep for joy o’ercame the chief; his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erflowed with tears; he sobbed; he knew them all.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
