<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 15: Return of Telemachus</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-15" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Return of Telemachus</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Appearance of Pallas in a dream to Telemachus, warning him to return to Ithaca⁠—His departure from Lacedaemon, and arrival at Pylos⁠—Theoclymenus, an augur, taken on board by him at Pylos⁠—The story of Eumaeus related by him to Ulysses⁠—Arrival of Telemachus at the coast of Ithaca⁠—The ship sent forward to the city, while Telemachus, having committed Theoclymenus to the care of his friend Piraeus, goes to the lodge of Eumaeus.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Then Pallas, hastening to the mighty realm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Lacedaemon, sought the illustrious son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of great Ulysses, to remind the youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of home, and bid him think of his return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She found Telemachus and Nestor’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon their couches in the portico</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Menelaus, the renowned. Deep sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held Nestor’s son; but to Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The welcome slumber came not, for his thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uneasily through all the quiet night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwelt on his father. Now beside his bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue-eyed Pallas took her stand and spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Telemachus, it is no longer well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou shouldst wander from thy home, and leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thy possessions, and those arrogant men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That crowd thy halls. Beware, lest they devour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy substance utterly, dividing all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among them, and this journey be for naught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make suit to Menelaus, great in war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly to send thee home, that thou mayst join</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy blameless mother in thy halls; for now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her father and her brothers counsel her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wed Eurymachus, whose gifts exceed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those of the other suitors, and besides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He offers a yet richer bridal dower.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It were not hard without thy leave to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wealth from a palace. What a wife will do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou knowest. ’T is her pleasure to increase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The riches of the man whom she has wed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Care of her former children has she none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor memory of the husband whom she took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet a maid, and who is in his grave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of these she never speaks. Return thou, then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give thy goods in charge to one among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The handmaids of thy household who shall seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fittest for the trust, until the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring thee a noble wife. Another word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have I for thee, and bear thou it in mind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chief among the suitors in the strait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the rugged Samos and the isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ithaca are lurking, in the hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slay thee on thy voyage home; but this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think they cannot do before the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hold many of the suitor-crew who make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy wealth a spoil. Steer thou thy gallant bark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from the isles; sail only in the night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some god, whoever it may be that keeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watch over thee, will send a prosperous gale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When to the nearest shore of Ithaca</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou comest in thy ship, let it go on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all thy comrades, to the town, while thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repairest to the keeper of thy swine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose heart is faithful to thee. There remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With him that night, and send him to the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tidings to the sage Penelope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou art come from Pylos and art safe.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So having said, the goddess took her way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to the Olympian height. Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched with his heel and wakened Nestor’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a soft slumber and bespake him thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Rise, Nestor’s son, Peisistratus, and bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The firm-paced steeds and yoke them to the car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we will now set forth upon our way.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Nestor’s son, Peisistratus, replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Telemachus, whatever be our haste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It were not well in darkness to begin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our journey, and the morn will soon be here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remain till Menelaus, Atreus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero mighty with the spear, shall come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bring his gifts, and place them in our car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And send us on our way with kindly words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well does a guest remember all his days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The generous host who shows himself his friend.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and quickly on her car of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared the Mom. Then Menelaus came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great in battle, from his couch beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair-haired Helen. When Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew of the king’s approach, the hero threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In haste his tunic o’er his noble form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over his broad shoulders flung a cloak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ample folds. Then, going forth, the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of great Ulysses met the king and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Atrides Menelaus, loved of Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sovereign of the people, send me hence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I pray, to the dear country of my birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For earnestly I long to be at home.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Menelaus, great in war, replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Telemachus, I will not keep thee long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thou so much desirest to return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am displeased with him who as a host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is lavish of his love, for he will hate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond due measure; best it is to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The middle way. It is alike a wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thrust the unwilling stranger out of doors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to detain him when he longs to go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While he is with us we should cherish him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, when he wishes, help him to depart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remain until I bring thee worthy gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And place them in thy chariot, that thine eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May look on them; and I will give command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in the palace here the women spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A liberal feast from stores that lie within.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if, in turning from thy course, thou choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pass through Hellas and the midland tract</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Argos, I will yoke my steeds and go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thee, and show the cities thronged with men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor will they send us empty-handed thence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But bring us gifts which we may bear away⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tripod, perchance, or caldron wrought of brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perchance a pair of mules or golden cup.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake discreet Telemachus in turn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Atrides Menelaus, loved of Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sovereign of the people, rather far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would I return to my own home; for there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is no man left in charge of what is mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I must go, lest, while I vainly seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father, I may perish, or may lose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some valued treasure from my palace rooms.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The valiant Menelaus heard, and bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wife and maidens spread without delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ready banquet from the stores within.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Eteöneus from his morning sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Boëtheus, came, for very near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His dwelling was. The sovereign bade him light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fire and roast the flesh, and he obeyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then into the fragrant treasure-room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descended Menelaus, not alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Helen and Megapenthes went with him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when they came to where the treasures lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides took a double goblet up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade his son, young Megapenthes, bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A silver beaker thence, while Helen stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the coffers where the embroidered robes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought by her hands were laid. The glorious dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took one and brought it forth, most beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In needlework, and amplest of them all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The garment glittered like a star, and lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Below the other robes. Then, passing through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace halls, they found Telemachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus the fair-haired Menelaus spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Telemachus, may Jove the Thunderer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Husband of Juno, grant thee to return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>According to thy wish! I give thee here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the treasures which my house contains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fairest and most precious. I present</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A goblet all of silver, save the lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they are bound with gold; it is the work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Vulcan. Phaedimus the hero, king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Sidonians, gave it me when once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His palace sheltered me. He gave it me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At parting, and I now would have it thine.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Atrides spake, and gave into his hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The double goblet. Megapenthes next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him set the shining beaker wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of silver. Rosy Helen, holding up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The robe, drew near, and spake to him and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I also bring to thee, dear son, a gift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The work of Helen’s hands, which thou shalt keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In memory of her, until the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy desired espousals, when thy bride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall wear it. Let it in the mean time lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within thy halls, in thy dear mother’s care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mayst thou soon and happily arrive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At thy fair palace and thy native coast.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she, placing in his hands the robe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took it, and was glad. Peisistratus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was moved with wonder as he saw, and laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The presents in the car. The fair-haired king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then led them to the hall, and seated them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thrones and couches, where a maiden brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Water in a fair golden ewer, and o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A silver basin poured it for their hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And near them set a table smoothly wrought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The matron of the palace brought them bread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a delicate dish to please the taste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From stores within the house. Then to the board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boëtheus’ son drew near and carved the meats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave to each a portion, while the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of glorious Menelaus poured the wine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guests put forth their hands and shared the food</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lay prepared before them. When the calls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thirst and hunger ceased, Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Nestor’s famous son brought forth and yoked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The steeds, and climbed into the sumptuous car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drove from out the echoing portico.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides Menelaus, amber-haired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went forth with them, and, holding in his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A golden cup of generous wine, poured out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An offering for their voyage to the gods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the steeds he took his stand, and first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drank from the cup, and then bespake the guests:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now fare ye well, young men, and when ye come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Nestor, shepherd of the people, give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greetings from me; for he was kind to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if he were a father, when the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greece were warring in the realm of Troy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake in turn discreet Telemachus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Assuredly I shall relate to him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As soon as I am with him, all that thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>foster-child of Jove, hast bid me say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would to heaven I might as surely tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses in his palace, when again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I come to Ithaca, how welcome thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast made me here, and how I came away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With treasures rich and many from thy court.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus he spake, an eagle to the right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared, that, flying, bore a large white goose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clutched from the tame flock in the palace court;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And men and women ran the way he flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shouted after him. Before the steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the young men, and still on the right hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bird went sweeping on. They saw well pleased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every heart was gladdened. To the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peisistratus, the son of Nestor, said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now tell me, Menelaus, loved of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prince of the people! does the god who sends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This portent mean the sign for us or thee?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and Menelaus, dear to Mars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paused, thinking how to answer him aright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thus the long-robed Helen interposed:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Listen to me, and I will prophesy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the gods prompt me, and as I believe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The event will be. Just as this eagle came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the wild hills, his birthplace and his haunt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seized and bore away the water-fowl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reared near our halls, so will Ulysses come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After much hardship and long wanderings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his own home, to be avenged: perchance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already is at home, and meditates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An evil end to all the suitor crew.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake discreet Telemachus in turn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“May Juno’s husband, Jove the Thunderer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So order the event, and I will there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make vows to thee as to a deity.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and touched the coursers with the lash;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through the city rapidly they went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And toward the plain, and all day long they shook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yoke upon their necks. The sun went down:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The roads all lay in darkness as they came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Pherae, and the house of Diodes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose father was Orsilochus, and he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The offspring of Alpheius. There that night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They slept; their host was liberal of his cheer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when appeared the daughter of the Dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rosy-fingered Morn, they yoked the steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And climbed the sumptuous car, and drove afield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From underneath the echoing portico.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Nestor plied the lash; the steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew not unwillingly, and quickly reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lofty citadel of Pylos. There</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus bespake his comrade thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Wilt thou consent to do what I shall ask,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O son of Nestor? ’T is our boast that we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are friends because our fathers were; besides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We are of equal age, and journeying thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has made our friendship firmer. Take me not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O foster-child of Jove, beyond the spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where lies my galley, lest against my will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aged Nestor should detain me here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through kindness, when I needs must hasten home.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and then the son of Nestor mused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How what his friend desired might best be done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this seemed wisest after careful thought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned the chariot to the ship and shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And taking out the garments and the gold⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful gifts which Menelaus gave⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He put them in the galley’s stern, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bespake Telemachus with winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Embark in haste, and summon all thy crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On board before I reach my home and tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aged king. I know how vehement</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His temper is; he will not let thee go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hastening hither to enforce thy stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Pylos, will not, I am sure, go back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without thee; his displeasure will be great.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and toward the Pylian city turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His steeds with flowing manes, and quickly reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His home. Meantime Telemachus held forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his companions, thus exhorting them:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My friends, make ready all things in our ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mount the deck, for we must now set sail.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, they hearkened and obeyed, and leaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On board and manned the benches. While he thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was hastening his departure, offering prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pouring wine to Pallas at the stern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stranger came, a seer, a fugitive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Argos, where his hand had slain a man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Melampus was his ancestor, who dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some time in Pylos, mother of fair flocks⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rich, and inhabiting a sumptuous house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Pylians. Afterward he joined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another people, fleeing from his home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the mighty Neleus, haughtiest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of living men, who, seizing his large wealth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held it a year by force. Melampus lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime within the house of Phylacus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fast bound, and suffering greatly, both because</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Neleus’ daughter, and of his own mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distempered by the unapproachable</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Erinnys. Yet did he escape from death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drove the lowing herds to Phylace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pylos, and avenged his cruel wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Neleus, carrying off his child to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A consort for his brother. Then he came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the realm of Argos, famed for steeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there it was decreed that he should dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rule o’er many of the Argive race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there he took a wife and built a house⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lofty pile; and there to him were born Antiphates and Mantius, valiant men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antiphates was father of a son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brave O’icleus, and to him was born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amphioraüs, one of those whose voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rouses the nations. Aegis-bearing Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Phoebus loved him with exceeding love;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet reached he not the threshold of old age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, through the treachery of his bribed wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perished too soon at Thebes. To him were born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two sons, Alcmaeon and Amphilochus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clytus and Polyphides were the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Mantius; but Aurora, she who fills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A golden chariot, bore away to heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clytus for his great beauty, there to dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the immortals, while Apollo gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Polyphides of the noble mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be a prophet, first of living men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since now Amphiaraüs was no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His father had displeased him, and he went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hyperesia, where he dwelt, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revealed to all what yet should come to pass.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It was his son who now approached; his name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Theoclymenus; he saw the prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus, who stood beside the swift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black ship, and, pouring a libation, prayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus he said to him in winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My friend, whom here beside this bark I find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making a pious offering, I entreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both by that offering and the deity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by thy life, and by the lives of these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who follow thee, declare to me the truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And keep back naught of all that I inquire⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who art thou, from what race of men, and where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy city lies, and who thy parents are.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake in turn discreet Telemachus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stranger, to every point I answer thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am by race a son of Ithaca,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father was Ulysses when alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he has died a miserable death;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long years has he been absent, and I came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my companions here, and this black ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gather tidings of my father’s fate.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then said the godlike Theoclymenus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I too, like thee, am far away from home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I have slain a man of my own tribe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he had many brothers, many friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Argos famed for steeds. Great is the power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those Achaians, and I flee from them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the black doom of death, to be henceforth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wanderer among men. O, shelter me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On board thy galley! I, a fugitive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Implore thy mercy, lest they overtake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slay me; they are surely on my track.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus discreet Telemachus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If thou desire to come on board my ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall not hinder thee. Come with us then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take a friendly share in what we have.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So saying he received his brazen spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid it on the good ship’s deck, and went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself on board, and, taking at the stern</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His place, he seated Theoclymenus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside him. Then the mariners cast loose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hawsers, and Telemachus gave forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The order to prepare for sea. They heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eagerly obeyed; they raised the mast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pine-tree stem⁠—and, bringing it to stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In its deep socket, bound it there with cords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hoisted by their strongly twisted thongs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ship’s white sails. The blue-eyed Pallas sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A favorable and fresh-blowing wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That swept the sky to drive more speedily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The galley through the salt-sea waves. They came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Cruni, and to Chalcis pleasantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watered by rivers. Now the sun went down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Night closed around their way, but onward still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A favorable wind from Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward Pherae bore them, and the hallowed coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Elis, where the Epeian race bear sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then among the isles whose rocky peaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise from the waters. Here Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mused thoughtfully on what his fate might be⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To perish by the ambush or escape.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime Ulysses and the swineherd sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At meat within the lodge; the other men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were at the board, and when the calls of thirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hunger ceased, Ulysses spake to try</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swineherd, whether he were bent to show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet further kindness, and entreat his stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or whether he would send him to the town.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Eumaeus, hearken thou, and all the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-morrow ’tis my wish to go to town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may beg, and be no charge to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy companions. Give me thy advice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And send a trusty guide to show the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There will I roam the streets, for so I must,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And haply some one there will give a cup</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wine and cake of meal. And when I find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The house of great Ulysses, I will tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sage Penelope the news I bring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, I would even go among the crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of arrogant suitors, who perhaps might give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A meal, for there is plenty at their feasts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I would do whatever they require.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For let me tell thee, and do thou give heed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There lives no man who can contend with me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In menial tasks⁠—to keep alive a fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fuel, cleave dry wood, and carve and roast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The meat and pour the wine⁠—whate’er is done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By poor men waiting on the better sort.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thou, Eumasus, keeper of the swine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst answer in displeasure: “Woe is me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How could thy bosom harbor such a thought?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O stranger! thou must surely be resolved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To perish if thy purpose be to go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the suitor crew, whose insolence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And riot reach the iron vault of heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not such attendants minister to them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou art, but fair youths arrayed in cloaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tunics, with sleek heads and smooth of face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These wait at polished tables heavily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loaded with bread and flesh and wine. Stay thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Content among us, sure that no one here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is wearied by thy presence, neither I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor any of my fellows. When he comes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dear son of Ulysses will provide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thee the garments thou dost need⁠—a cloak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tunic⁠—and will send thee where thou wilt.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the great sufferer, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I pray that thou mayst be as dear to Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great All-Father, as thou art to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since through thy kindness I enjoy a pause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid my weary wanderings. There is naught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worse than a wandering life. Unseemly cares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hungry stomach brings to homeless men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hardship and grief are theirs. But since thou wilt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I remain and wait for thy young lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak to me of the mother of thy chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, and his father, whom he left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just on the threshold of old age, if yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They live, and still may look upon the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or have they died, and passed to Pluto’s realm?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then in turn the master swineherd spake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Rightly and truly will I answer thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>stranger! still Laertes lives, but prays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Continually to Jove that he may die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his own house; for sorely he laments</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His son long absent, and his excellent wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bride of his youth, whose death has brought on him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sharp sorrow, and old age before its time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a sad death she died⁠—through wasting grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For her lost, glorious son. May no one here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No friend of mine, nor one who has bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A kindness on me, die by such a death!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet she lived, great as her sorrow was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I loved to speak with her and hear her words;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For she had reared me with her youngest-born⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her daughter, long-robed Ctimena. With her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was I brought up, and scarcely less than her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was held in honor. When at length we came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the pleasant years of youth, they sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The princess hence to Samos, and received at</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large presents; but to me her mother gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Garments of price, a tunic and a cloak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sandals for my feet, and sent me forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the fields, and loved me more and more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this is over now, yet must I say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My calling has been prospered by the gods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prom this I have the means to eat and drink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wherewithal to feast a worthy guest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But from the queen I never have a word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or deed of kindness, since that evil came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon her house⁠—that crew of lawless men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greatly the servants would rejoice to speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before their mistress, and inquire her will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eat and drink, and carry to their homes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some gift, for gifts delight a servant’s heart.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again Ulysses, the sagacious, spake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Swineherd Eumaeus, thou, while yet a child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wert doubtless strangely tossed about the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from thy kindred and thy native land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now tell me, was the spacious town wherein</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy father and thy mother dwelt laid waste?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wert thou left among the flocks and herds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untended, and borne off by hostile men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who came in ships and sold thee to the lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of these possessions for a worthy price?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the master swineherd spake again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Since thou dost ask me, stranger, hear my words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In silence; sit at ease and drink thy wine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These nights are very long; there’s time enough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sleep, and time to entertain ourselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With talk. It is not fitting to lie down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the due hour arrive, and too much sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is hurtful. Whosoever here shall feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strong desire, let him withdraw and sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rise with early morn and break his fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tend my master’s swine. Let us remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within, and drink and feast, and pass the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gayly, relating what we have endured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each one of us; for in the after time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One who has suffered much and wandered far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May take a pleasure even in his griefs.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But let me tell what thou hast asked of me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond Ortygia lies an island named</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Syria; thou must have heard of it. The sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above it turns his course. It is not large,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But fruitful, fit for pasturage, and rich</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In flocks, abounding both in wine and wheat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There never famine comes, nor foul disease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fastens on wretched mortals; but when men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grow old, Apollo of the silver bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes with Diana, aims his silent shafts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slays them. There two cities stand, and share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The isle between them. There my father reigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The godlike Ctesias, son of Ormenus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And both the cities owned him as their king.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There came a crew of that seafaring race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people of Phoenicia, to our isle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrewd fellows they, and brought in their black ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large store of trinkets. In my father’s house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was a Phoenician woman, large and fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And skilful in embroidery. As she came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A laundress to their ship, those cunning men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seduced her. One of them obtained her love⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For oft doth love mislead weak womankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even of the more discreet. Her paramour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asked who she was, and whence. She pointed out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lofty pile in which my father dwelt.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘At Sidon, rich in brass, I had my birth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A daughter of the opulent Arybas;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And once, as I was coming from the fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Taphian pirates seized and bore me off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brought me to this isle and sold me here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At that man’s house; much gold he paid for me.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then said her paramour: ‘Wilt thou not then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return with us, that thou mayst see again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Father and mother, and their fair abode?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For yet they live, and rumor says are rich.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“To this the woman answered: ‘I consent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If first ye take an oath⁠—ye mariners⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pledge your faith to bear me safely home.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She spake, and they complied, and when the oath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was duly taken, thus the woman said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Now hold your peace; let none of all the crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak to me more, in meeting on the road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or at the fountain, lest some one should tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man at the house, and he suspect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some fraud and bind me fast, and plot your death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lock up your words within your breast; make haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To buy supplies, and when the ship is full</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all things needful, let a messenger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come to me at the palace with all speed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will bring with me whatever gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My hands may find, and something else to pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My passage. I am nurse to the young heir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the good man who dwells in yonder halls⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shrewd boy for his years, who oft goes out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With me⁠—and I will lead him to the ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he will bring, in any foreign land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To which ye carry him, a liberal price.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The woman spake, and to our fair abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Departed. The Phoenician crew remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until the twelvemonth’s end, and filled their ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many things, and, when its roomy hull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was fully laden, sent a messenger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tell the woman. He, a cunning man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to my father’s house, and brought with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A golden necklace set with amber beads.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace maidens and the gracious queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mother, took it in their hands, and gazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon it, and debated of its price.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime the bearer gave the sign, and soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Departed to the ship. The woman took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My hand and led me forth. Within the hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She found upon the tables ready placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goblets for my father’s guests, his peers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they were absent, and in council yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid a great assembly. She concealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three goblets in her bosom, and bore off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The theft. I followed thoughtlessly. The sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went down, and darkness brooded o’er the ways.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Briskly we walked, and reached the famous port</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fast-sailing ship. They took us both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On board, and sailed. Along its ocean path</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vessel ran, and Jupiter bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A favorable wind. Six days we sailed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both night and day; but when Saturnian Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought the seventh day, Diana, archer-queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck down the woman, and with sudden noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Headlong she plunged into the hold, as dives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sea-gull. But the seamen cast her forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fishes and to sea-calves. I was left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone and sorrowful. The winds and waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carried our galley on to Ithaca;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there Laertes purchased me, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I first beheld the land in which I dwell.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then again the great Ulysses spake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Eumaeus, the sad story of thy wrongs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sufferings moves me deeply; yet hath Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among thy evil fortunes given this good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, after all thy sufferings, thou art lodged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a good master, who abundantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Provides thee meat and drink; thou leadest here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pleasant life, while I am corae to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From wandering long and over many lands.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So talked they with each other. No long time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They passed in sleep, for soon the Morning came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throned on her car of gold. Beside the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The comrades of Telemachus cast loose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sails, took down the mast, and with their oars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought in the vessel to its place. They threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The anchors out and bound the hawsers fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And went upon the sea-beach, where they dressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their morning meal, and mingled purple wine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, when the calls of thirst and hunger ceased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Discreet Telemachus bespake the crew:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Take the black ship to town. I visit first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fields, and see my herdsmen, and at eve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will come to town. To-morrow I will give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The parting feast, rich meats and generous wine.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then said the godlike Theoclymenus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whither, my son, am I to go? What house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the chiefs of rugged Ithaca</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I seek shelter in ? with thee, perhaps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thine own palace where thy mother dwells.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus discreet Telemachus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I would have asked thee at another time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make our house thy home, for there would be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No lack of kindly welcome. ’T were not well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ask thee now, for I shall not be there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor will my mother see thee⁠—since not oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth she appear before the suitor-train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in an upper room, apart from them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weaves at her loom a web. Another man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I name, Eurymachus, the illustrious son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the sage Polybus, to be thy host.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noblest of the suitors he, and seeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most earnestly to wed the queen, and take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rank Ulysses held. Olympian Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who dwells in ether, knows the fatal day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That may o’ertake the suitors ere she wed.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus he spake, a falcon on the right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew by, Apollo’s messenger. A dove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was in his talons, which he tore, and poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The feathers down between Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where the galley lay. When this was seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Theoclymenus, he called the youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart, alone, and took his hand and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The bird that passed us, O Telemachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the right, flew not without a god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guide him. When I saw it, well I knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The omen. Not in Ithaca exists</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A house of a more kingly destiny</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than thine, and ever will its power prevail.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus discreet Telemachus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O stranger, may thy saying come to pass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shalt thou quickly know me for thy friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be rewarded with such liberal gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all who meet thee shall rejoice with thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then turning to Piraeus he bespake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That faithful follower thus: “Pirseus, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Clytius, thou who ever wert the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To move, at my command, of all the men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who went with me to Pylos, take, I pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This stranger to thy house, and there provide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him, and honor him until I come.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Piraeus, mighty with the spear, replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Telemachus, however long thy stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This man shall be my guest, nor ever lack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath my roof for hospitable care.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and climbed the deck, and bade his men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enter the ship and cast the fastenings loose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly they came together, went on board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And manned the benches, while Telemachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound the fair sandals to his feet, and took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His massive spear with its sharp blade of brass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lay upon the deck. The men unbound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hawsers, shoved the galley forth, and sailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Townward, as they were bidden by the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of great Ulysses. Meantime the quick feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the young chieftain bore him on until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He reached the lodge where his great herds of swine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were fed, and, careful of his master’s wealth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside his charge the worthy swineherd slept.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
