<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 9: The Ciconians, Lotus-Eaters, and Cyclops</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Ciconians, Lotus-Eaters, and Cyclops</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The adventures of Ulysses after the fall of Troy related by him at the request of Alcinoüs⁠—His attack on the Ciconians and the destruction of their city⁠—Rally and reinforcement of the Ciconians, who slaughter many of the companions of Ulysses⁠—The lotus-eaters, who subsist on flowers⁠—Arrival of Ulysses at the land of the cyclops⁠—Polyphemus and his barbarities⁠—Revenge of Ulysses, who puts out the single eye of Polyphemus and escapes.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O King Alcinoüs, most renowned of men!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pleasant thing it is to hear a bard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like this, endowed with such a voice, so like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The voices of the gods. Nor can I deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aught more delightful than the general joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a whole people when the assembled guests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seated in order in the royal halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are listening to the minstrel, while the board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is spread with bread and meats, and from the jars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cupbearer draws wine and fills the cups.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me there is no more delightful sight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But now thy mind is moved to ask of me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The story of the sufferings I have borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that will wake my grief anew. What first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What next, shall I relate? what last of all?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For manifold are the misfortunes cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon me by the immortals. Let me first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Declare my name, that ye may know, and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perchance, before my day of death shall come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May be your host, though dwelling far away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am Ulysses, and my father’s name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laertes; widely am I known to men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As quick in shrewd devices, and my fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath reached to heaven. In sunny Ithaca</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I dwell, where high Neritus, seen afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rustles with woods. Around are many isles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well peopled, near each other. Samos there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies, with Dulichium, and Zacynthus dark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With forests. Ithaca, with its low shores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies highest toward the setting sun; the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are on the side where first the morning breaks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rugged region ’tis, but nourishes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobly its youths, nor have I ever seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sweeter spot on earth. Calypso late,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That glorious goddess, in her grotto long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Detained me from it, and desired that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should be her husband; in her royal home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeëan Circè, mistress of strange arts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Detained me also, and desired that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should be her husband⁠—yet they could not move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The purpose of my heart. For there is naught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More sweet and dear than our own native land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And parents, though perchance our lot be cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a rich home, yet far from our own kin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a foreign land. Now let me speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the calamitous voyage which the will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jove ordained on my return from Troy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The wind that blew me from the Trojan shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore me to the Ciconians, who abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Ismarus. I laid the city waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slew its dwellers, carried off their wives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all their wealth and parted them among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My men, that none might want an equal share.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then I warned them with all haste to leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The region. Madmen! they obeyed me not.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And there they drank much wine, and on the beach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slew many sheep and many slow-paced steers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With crumpled horns. Then the Ciconians called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To their Ciconian neighbors, braver men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than they, and more in number, whose abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was on the mainland, trained to fight from steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, if need were, on foot. In swarms they came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thick as new leaves or morning flowers in spring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then fell on our unhappy company</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An evil fate from Jove, and many griefs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They formed their lines, and fought at our good ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where man encountered man with brazen spears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet ’twas morning, and the holy light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of day waxed brighter, we withstood the assault</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kept our ground, although more numerous they.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the sun was sloping toward the west</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The enemy prevailed; the Achaian band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was routed, and was made to flee. That day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There perished from each galley of our fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Six valiant men; the rest escaped with life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Onward we sailed, lamenting bitterly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our comrades slain, yet happy to escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From death ourselves. Nor did we put to sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In our good ships until we thrice had called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aloud by name each one of our poor friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who fell in battle by Ciconian hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cloud-compeller, Jove, against us sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The north-wind in a hurricane, and wrapped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth and heaven in clouds, and from the skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell suddenly the night. With stooping masts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our galleys scudded; the strong tempest split</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tore the sails; we drew and laid them down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the ships, in fear of utter wreck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And toward the mainland eagerly we turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rudders. There we lay two days and nights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worn out with grief and hardship. When at length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair-haired Morning brought the third day round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We raised the masts, and, spreading the white sails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take the wind, we sat us down. The wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carried us forward with the pilot’s aid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then should I have reached my native land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safely, had not the currents and the waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ocean and the north-wind driven me back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What time I strove to pass Maleia’s cape,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swept me to Cytherae from my course.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Still onward driven before those baleful winds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the fishy deep for nine whole days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the tenth day we reached the land where dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lotus-eaters, men whose food is flowers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We landed on the mainland, and our crews</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the fleet galleys took their evening meal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when we all had eaten and had drunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sent explorers forth⁠—two chosen men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A herald was the third⁠—to learn what race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mortals nourished by the fruits of earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Possessed the land. They went and found themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Lotus-eaters soon, who used</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No violence against their lives, but gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into their hands the lotus plant to taste.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whoever tasted once of that sweet food</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wished not to see his native country more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor give his friends the knowledge of his fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then my messengers desired to dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Lotus-eaters, and to feed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the lotus, never to return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By force I led them weeping to the fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bound them in the hollow ships beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The benches. Then I ordered all the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my beloved comrades to embark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In haste, lest, tasting of the lotus, they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should think no more of home. All straightway went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On board, and on the benches took their place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote the hoary ocean with their oars.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Onward we sailed with sorrowing hearts, and reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The country of the Cyclops, an untamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lawless race, who, trusting to the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plant not, nor plough the fields, but all things spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For them untended⁠—barley, wheat, and vines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yielding large clusters filled with wine, and nursed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By showers from Jove. No laws have they; they hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No councils. On the mountain heights they dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vaulted caves, where each one rules his wives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And children as he pleases; none give heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To what the others do. Before the port</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that Cyclopean land there is an isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low-lying, neither near nor yet remote⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A woodland region, where the wild goats breed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Innumerable; for the foot of man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disturbs them not, and huntsmen toiling through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thick woods, or wandering over mountain heights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enter not here. The fields are never grazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By sheep, nor furrowed by the plough, but lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untilled, unsown, and uninhabited</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By man, and only feed the bleating goats.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cyclops have no barques with crimson prows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor shipwrights skilled to frame a galley’s deck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With benches for the rowers, and equipped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For any service, voyaging by turns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the cities, as is often done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By men who cross the deep from place to place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make a prosperous region of an isle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No meagre soil is there; it well might bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All fruits in their due time. Along the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the gray deep are meadows smooth and moist.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vine would flourish long; the ploughman’s task</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is easy, and the husbandman would reap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large harvests, for the mould is rich below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there is a safe haven, where no need</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of cable is; no anchor there is cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor hawsers fastened to the strand, but they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who enter there remain until it please</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mariners, with favorable wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To put to sea again. A limpid stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flows from a fount beneath a hollow rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into that harbor at its further end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And poplars grow around it. Thither went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our fleet; some deity had guided us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the dark night, for nothing had we seen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thick was the gloom around our barques; the moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone not in heaven, the clouds had quenched her light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No eye discerned the isle, nor the long waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rolled against the shore, till our good ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched land, and, disembarking there, we gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ourselves to sleep upon the waterside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waited for the holy Morn to rise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And when at length the daughter of the Dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rosy-fingered Morn, appeared, we walked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the isle, admiring as we went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile the nymphs, the daughters of the God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who bears the aegis, roused the mountain goats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That so our crews might make their morning meal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straightway from our ships we took in hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our crooked bows and our long-bladed spears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Let all the rest of my beloved friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remain, while I, with my own barque and crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go forth to learn what race of men are these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether ill-mannered, savage, and unjust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or kind to guests and reverent toward the gods.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I spake, and, having ordered all my crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To go on board and cast the hawsers loose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embarked on my own ship. They all obeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And manned the benches, sitting there in rows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote the hoary ocean with their oars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when we came upon that neighboring coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We saw upon its verge beside the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cave high vaulted, overbrowed with shrubs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of laurel. There much cattle lay at rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both sheep and goats. Around it was a court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A high enclosure of hewn stone, and pines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tall stemmed, and towering oaks. Here dwelt a man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of giant bulk, who by himself, alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was wont to tend his flocks. He never held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Converse with others, but devised apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wicked deeds. A frightful prodigy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was he, and like no man who lives by bread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But more like a huge mountain summit, rough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With woods, that towers alone above the rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then, bidding all the others stay and guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ship, I chose among my bravest men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twelve whom I took with me. I had on board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A goatskin of dark wine⁠—a pleasant sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Maron late, Evanthes’ son, a priest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phoebus, guardian god of Ismarus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave me, when, moved with reverence, we saved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him and his children and his wife from death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his abode was in the thick-grown grove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phoebus. Costly were the gifts he gave⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven talents of wrought gold; a chalice all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of silver; and he drew for me, besides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into twelve jars, a choice rich wine, unspoiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By mixtures, and a beverage for gods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one within his dwellings, maids or men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew of it, save the master and his wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And matron of the household. Whensoe’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They drank this rich red wine, he only filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A single cup with wine, and tempered that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With twenty more of water. From the cup</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose a fragrance that might please the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hard it was to put the draught aside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this I took a skin well filled, besides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Food in a hamper⁠—for my thoughtful mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Misgave me, lest I should encounter one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of formidable strength and savage mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with no sense of justice or of right.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Soon were we at the cave, but found not him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within it; he was in the fertile meads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tending his flocks. We entered, wondering much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At all we saw. Around were baskets heaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With cheeses; pens were thronged with lambs and kids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each in a separate fold; the elder ones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The younger, and the newly yeaned, had each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their place apart. The vessels swam with whey⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pails smoothly wrought, and buckets into which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He milked the cattle. My companions then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begged me with many pressing words to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part of the cheeses, and, returning, drive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With speed to our good galley lambs and kids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From where they stabled, and set sail again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the salt sea. I granted not their wish;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far better if I had. ’Twas my intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see the owner of the flocks and prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hospitality. No pleasant sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was that to be for those with whom I came.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And then we lit a fire, and sacrificed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ate the cheeses, and within the cave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat waiting, till from pasturing his flocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came; a heavy load of well-dried wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bore, to make a blaze at suppertime.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without the den he flung his burden down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such a crash that we in terror slunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a corner of the cave. He drove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His well-fed flock, all those whose milk he drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under that spacious vault of rock, but left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The males, both goats and rams, without the court.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then he lifted a huge barrier up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty weight; not two-and-twenty wains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four-wheeled and strong, could move it from the ground:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such was the enormous rock he raised, and placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the entrance. Then he sat and milked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ewes and bleating goats each one in turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave to each its young. Next, half the milk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He caused to curdle, and disposed the curd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In woven baskets; and the other half</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He kept in bowls to be his evening drink.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His tasks all ended thus, he lit a fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw us where we lurked, and questioned us:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Who are ye, strangers? Tell me whence ye came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the ocean. Are ye men of trade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wanderers at will, like those who roam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea for plunder, and, with their own lives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In peril, carry death to distant shores?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake, and we who heard with sinking hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trembled at that deep voice and frightful form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus I answered: ‘We are Greeks who come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Ilium, driven across the mighty deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By changing winds, and while we sought our home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have made a different voyage, and been forced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon another course; such was the will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jupiter. We boast ourselves to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soldiers of Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose fame is now the greatest under heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So mighty was the city which he sacked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many were the warriors whom he slew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now we come as suppliants to thy knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ask thee to receive us as thy guests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else bestow the gifts which custom makes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stranger’s due. Great as thou art, revere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods; for suitors to thy grace are we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hospitable Jove, whose presence goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With every worthy stranger, will avenge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suppliants and strangers when they suffer wrong.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake, and savagely he answered me:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Thou art a fool, O stranger, or art come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From some far country⁠—thou who biddest me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear or regard the gods. We little care⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We Cyclops⁠—for the Aegis-bearer, Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or any other of the blessed gods;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We are their betters. Think not I would spare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee or thy comrades to avoid the wrath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jupiter, unless it were my choice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But say⁠—for I would know⁠—where hast thou left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy gallant barque in landing? was it near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or in some distant corner of the isle?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake to tempt me, but I well perceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His craft, and answered with dissembling words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Neptune, who shakes the shores, hath wrecked my barque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On rocks that edge thine island, hurling it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the headland. From the open sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tempest swept it hitherward, and I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With these, escaped the bitter doom of death.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake; the savage answered not, but sprang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, laying hands on my companions, seized</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two, whom he dashed like whelps against the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their brains flowed out, and weltered where they fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hewed them limb from limb for his repast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, like a lion of the mountain wilds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devoured them as they were, and left no part⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entrails nor flesh nor marrowy bones. We wept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see his cruelties, and raised our hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Jove, and hopeless misery filled our hearts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the Cyclops now had filled himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devouring human flesh, and drinking milk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmingled, in his cave he laid him down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretched out amid his flocks. The thought arose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my courageous heart to go to him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And draw the trenchant sword upon my thigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where the midriff joins the liver deal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stroke to pierce his breast. A second thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restrained me⁠—that a miserable death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would overtake us, since we had no power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To move the mighty rock which he had laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the high opening. So all night we grieved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting the holy Morn; and when at length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rosy-fingered daughter of the Dawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared, the Cyclops lit a fire, and milked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fair flock one by one, and brought their young</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each to its mother’s side. When he had thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Performed his household tasks, he seized again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two of our number for his morning meal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These he devoured, and then he moved away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With ease the massive rock that closed the cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, driving forth his well-fed flock, he laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The massive barrier back, as one would fit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lid upon a quiver. With loud noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cyclops drove that well-fed flock afield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I was left to think of many a plan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do him mischief and avenge our wrongs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If haply Pallas should confer on me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That glory. To my mind, as I revolved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plans, this seemed the wisest of them all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Beside the stalls there lay a massive club</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of olive-wood, yet green, which from its stock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cyclops hewed, that he might carry it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When seasoned. As it lay it seemed to us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mast of some black galley, broad of beam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With twenty oarsmen, built to carry freight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the mighty deep⁠—such was its length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thickness. Standing by it, I cut off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fathom’s length, and gave it to my men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade them smooth its sides, and they obeyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I made sharp the smaller end, and brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The point to hardness in the glowing fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then I hid the weapon in a heap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of litter, which lay thick about the cave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I bade my comrades now decide by lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which of them all should dare, along with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lift the stake, and with its point bore out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our enemy’s eye, when softly wrapped in sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lot was cast, and fell on those whom most</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wished with me⁠—four men, and I the fifth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“At eve the keeper of these fair-woolled flocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returned, and brought his well-fed sheep and goats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the spacious cavern, leaving none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without it, whether through some doubt of us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or through the ordering of some god. He raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The massive rock again, and laid it close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the opening. Then he sat and milked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ewes and bleating goats, each one in turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave to each her young. When he had thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Performed his household tasks, he seized again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two of our number for his evening meal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then drew I near, and bearing in my hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wooden cup of dark red wine I said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Take this, O Cyclops, after thy repast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of human flesh, and drink, that thou mayst know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What liquor was concealed within our ship.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I brought it as an offering to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I had hope that thou wouldst pity us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And send us home. Yet are thy cruelties</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond all limit. Wicked as thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereafter who, of all the human race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will dare approach thee, guilty of such wrong?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“As thus I spake, he took the cup and drank.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The luscious wine delighted mightily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His palate, and he asked a second draught.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Give me to drink again, and generously,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tell thy name, that I may make a gift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as becomes a host. The fertile land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which the Cyclops dwell yields wine, ’tis true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the large grapes are nursed by rains from Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But nectar and ambrosia are in this.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake; I gave him of the generous juice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again, and thrice I filled and brought the cup,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrice the Cyclops in his folly drank.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when I saw the wine begin to cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His senses, I bespake him blandly thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Thou hast inquired, O Cyclops, by what name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men know me. I will tell thee, but do thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestow in turn some hospitable gift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou hast promised. Noman is my name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father and my mother gave it me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Noman am I called by all my friends.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I ended, and he answered savagely:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Noman shall be the last of all his band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom I will eat, the rest will I devour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him. Let that respite be my gift.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake, and, sinking backward at full length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay on the ground, with his huge neck aside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All-powerful sleep had overtaken him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then from his mouth came bits of human flesh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mingled with wine, and from his drunken throat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejected noisily. I put the stake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the glowing coals to gather heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And uttered cheerful words, encouraging</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My men, that none might fail me through their fears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the olive-wood began to blaze⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For though yet green it freely took the lire⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I drew it from the embers. Round me stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My comrades, whom some deity inspired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With calm, high courage. In their hands they took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrust into his eye the pointed bar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While perched upon a higher stand than they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I twirled it round. As when a workman bores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some timber of a ship, the men who stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Below him with a strap, on either side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twirl it, and round it spins unceasingly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, thrusting in his eye that pointed bar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We made it turn. The blood came streaming forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the hot wood; the eyelids and the brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were scalded by the vapor, and the roots</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the scorched eyeball crackled with the fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a smith, in forging axe or adze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunges, to temper it, the hissing blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into cold water, strengthening thus the steel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So hissed the eyeball of the Cyclops round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That olive stake. He raised a fearful howl;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rocks rang with it, and we fled from him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In terror. Plucking from his eye the stake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All foul and dripping with the abundant blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He flung it madly from him with both hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then called he to the Cyclops who in grots</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwelt on that breezy height. They heard his voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came by various ways, and stood beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cave, and asked the occasion of his grief.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘What hurts thee, Polyphemus, that thou thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost break our slumbers in the ambrosial night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With cries? Hath any of the sons of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driven off thy flocks in spite of thee, or tried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By treachery or force to take thy life?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Huge Polyphemus answered from his den:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘O friends! ’tis Noman who is killing me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By treachery Noman kills me; none by force’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then thus with winged words they spake again:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘If no man does thee violence, and thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art quite alone, reflect that none escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diseases; they are sent by Jove. But make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy prayer to Father Neptune, ocean’s king.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So spake they and departed. In my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I laughed to think that by the name I took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by my shrewd device, I had deceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cyclops. Meantime, groaning and in pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And groping with his hands, he moved away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rock that barred the entrance. There he sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With arms outstretched, to seize whoever sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To issue from the cavern with the flock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So dull of thought he deemed me. Then I planned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How best to save my comrades and myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From death. I framed a thousand stratagems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And arts⁠—for here was life at stake, and great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The danger was. At last I fixed on this.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The rams were plump and beautiful, and large</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thick dark fleeces. These I silently</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound to each other, three and three, with twigs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which that prodigy of lawless guilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cyclops, made his bed. The middle ram</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of every three conveyed a man; the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One on each side, were there to make him safe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus each of us was borne by three; but I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chose for myself the finest one of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seized him by the back, and, slipping down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath his shaggy belly, stretched myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length, and clung with resolute heart, and hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That firmly clenched the rich abundant fleece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then sighed we for the holy Morn to rise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And when again the daughter of the Dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rosy-fingered Morn, looked forth, the males</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went forth to pasture, while the ewes remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the stables, bleating, yet unmilked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For heavy were their udders. Carefully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The master handled, though in grievous pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The back of everyone that rose and passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, slow of thought, perceived not that my men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were clinging hid beneath their woolly breasts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the last ram of all the flock went out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His thick fleece heavy with my weight, and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In agitated thought, he felt his back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus the giant Polyphemus spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘My favorite ram, how art thou now the last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To leave the cave? It hath not been thy wont</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To let the sheep go first, but thou didst come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earliest to feed among the flowery grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walking with stately strides, and thou wert first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the fresh stream, and first at eve to seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stable; now thou art the last of all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grievest thou for thy master, who has lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eye, put out by a deceitful wretch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his vile crew, who stupefied me first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wine⁠—this Noman⁠—who, if right I deem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has not escaped from death. O, didst thou think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I do, and hadst but the power of speech</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tell me where he hides from my strong arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then should his brains, dashed out against the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be scattered here and there; then should my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be somewhat lighter, even amid the woes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Noman, worthless wretch, has brought on me!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake, and sent him forth among the rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when we were a little way beyond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cavern and the court, I loosed my hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the animal and unbound my men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then quickly we surrounded and drove off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fat sheep and stately paced, a numerous flock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brought them to our ship, where joyfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our friends received us, though with grief and tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For those who perished. Yet I suffered not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they should weep, but, frowning, gave command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By signs to lift with speed the fair-woolled sheep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On board, and launch our ship on the salt sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They went on board, where each one took his place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the benches, and with diligent oars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote the gray deep; and when we were as far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one upon the shore could hear a shout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to the Cyclops tauntingly I called:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ‘Ha! Cyclops! those whom in thy rocky cave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, in thy brutal fury, hast devoured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were friends of one not unexpert in war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amply have thy own guilty deeds returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon thee. Cruel one! who didst not fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To eat the strangers sheltered by thy roof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove and the other gods avenge them thus.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake; the anger in his bosom raged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More fiercely. From a mountain peak he wrenched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its summit, hurling it to fall beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our galley, where it almost touched the helm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rock dashed high the water where it fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the returning billow swept us back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And toward the shore. I seized a long-stemmed pike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pushed it from the shore, encouraging</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men to bend with vigor to their oars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so escape. With nods I gave the sign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forward to vigorous strokes the oarsmen leaned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till we were out at sea as far from land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when I spake before, and then again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shouted to the Cyclops, though my crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strove to prevent it with beseeching words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one man first and then another said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ’O most unwise! why chafe that savage man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fury⁠—him who just has cast his bolt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the sea, and forced us toward the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where we had well-nigh perished? Should he hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cry from us, or even a word of speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then would he fling a rock to crush our heads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wreck our ship, so fatal is his cast.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake, but moved not my courageous heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then I spake again, and angrily:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ‘Cyclops, if any man of mortal birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Note thine unseemly blindness, and inquire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The occasion, tell him that Laertes’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, the destroyer of walled towns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose home is Ithaca, put out thine eye.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake; he answered with a wailing voice:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Now, woe is me! the ancient oracles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concerning me have come to pass. Here dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A seer named Telemus Eurymides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great, good, and eminent in prophecy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prophesying he grew old among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cyclops. He foretold my coming fate⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I should lose my sight, and by the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cunning of Ulysses. Yet I looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For one of noble presence, mighty strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And giant stature landing on our coast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now a mere weakling, insignificant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And small of stature, has put out my eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First stupefying me with wine. Yet come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither, I pray, Ulysses, and receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hospitable gifts which are thy due;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will pray to Neptune, and entreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty god to guide thee safely home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His son am I, and he declares himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father. He can heal me if he will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no one else of all the immortal gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or mortal men can give me back my sight.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake; I answered: ‘Rather would I take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy life and breath, and send thee to the abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hades, where thou wouldst be past the power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of even Neptune to restore thine eye.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“As thus I said, the Cyclops raised his hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spread them toward the starry heaven, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prayed to the deity who rules the deep:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Hear, dark-haired Neptune, who dost swathe the earth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I am thine, and thou dost own thyself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father, grant that this Ulysses ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May reach his native land! But if it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The will of fate that he behold again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friends, and enter his own palace-halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his own country, late and sorrowful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be his return, with all his comrades lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a borrowed ship, and may he find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his own home new griefs awaiting him.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He prayed, and Neptune hearkened to his prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the Cyclops seized another stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far larger than the last, and swung it round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cast it with vast strength. It fell behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our black-prowed galley, where it almost struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rudder’s end. The sea was dashed on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the falling rock, and bore our ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On toward the shore we sought. When we reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The island where together in a fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our other galleys lay, we found our friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sitting where they had waited long in grief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We touched the shore and drew our galley up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the smooth sand, and stepped upon the beach;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And taking from on board the sheep that formed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part of the Cyclops’ flock, divided them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That none might be without an equal share.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When all the rest were shared, my warrior friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decreed the ram to me. Of him I made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the beach a sacrifice to Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cloud-compeller, Saturn’s son, whose rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is over all; to him I burned the thighs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He heeded not the offering; even then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He planned the wreck of all my gallant ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And death of my dear comrades. All that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till set of sun we sat and feasted high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the abundant meats and delicate wine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the sun went down, and darkness crept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the earth, we slumbered on the shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when again the daughter of the Dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rosy-fingered Morn, looked forth, I called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My men with cheerful words to climb the decks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cast the hawsers loose. With speed they went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On board and manned the benches, took in hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The oars and smote with them the hoary deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Onward in sadness, glad to have escaped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We sailed, yet sorrowing for our comrades lost.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
