<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 6: Ulysses Discovered by Nausicaä</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-6" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Ulysses Discovered by Nausicaä</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Nausicaä, daughter of Alcinoüs, king of the Phaeacians, directed by Pallas to go to the river and wash her marriage robes⁠—Sports of her maidens after the washing is performed⁠—Ulysses awakened by the noise, relieved and clothed by Nausicaä, and bidden to follow her into the city, and there make his suit to the queen, the wife of Alcinoüs.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Thus overcome with toil and weariness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble sufferer Ulysses slept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Pallas hastened to the realm and town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peopled by the Phaeacians, who of yore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abode in spacious Hypereia, near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The insolent race of Cyclops, and endured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrong from their mightier hands. A godlike chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nausithoüs, led them, to a new abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And planted them in Scheria, far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From plotting neighbors. With a wall he fenced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their city, built them dwellings there, and reared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fanes to the gods, and changed the plain to fields.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he had bowed to death, and had gone down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hades, and Alcinoüs, whom the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endowed with wisdom, governed in his stead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now to his palace, planning the return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the magnanimous Ulysses, came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue-eyed goddess Pallas, entering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gorgeous chamber where a damsel slept⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nausicaä, daughter of the large-souled king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcinoüs, beautiful in form and face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one of the immortals. Near her lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the portal, one on either side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair as the Graces, two attendant maids.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shining doors were shut. But Pallas came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As comes a breath of air, and stood beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The damsel’s head and spake. In look she seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daughter of the famous mariner</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dymas, a maiden whom Nausicaä loved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The playmate of her girlhood. In her shape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue-eyed goddess stood, and thus she said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nausicaä, has thy mother then brought forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A careless housewife? Thy magnificent robes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lie still neglected, though thy marriage day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is near, when thou art to array thyself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In seemly garments, and bestow the like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On those who lead thee to the bridal rite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thus the praise of men is won, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy father and thy gracious mother both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be rejoiced. Now with the early dawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us all hasten to the washing-place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I too would go with thee, and help thee there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou mayst sooner end the task, for thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not long wilt be unwedded. Thou art wooed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already by the noblest of the race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Phaeacians, for thy birth, like theirs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is of the noblest. Make thy suit at morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy illustrious father, that he bid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mules and car be harnessed to convey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy girdles, robes, and mantles marvellous</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In beauty. That were seemlier than to walk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since distant from the town the lavers lie.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having said, the blue-eyed Pallas went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to Olympus, where the gods have made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So saith tradition, their eternal seat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tempest shakes it not, nor is it drenched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By showers, and there the snow doth never fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The calm clear ether is without a cloud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the golden light, that lies on all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Days after day the blessed gods rejoice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither the blue-eyed goddess, having given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her message to the sleeping maid, withdrew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Soon the bright morning came. Nausicaä rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clad royally, as marvelling at her dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She hastened through the palace to declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her purpose to her father and the queen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She found them both within. Her mother sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the hearth with her attendant maids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turned the distaff loaded with a fleece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dyed in sea-purple. On the threshold stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her father, going forth to meet the chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Phaeacians in a council where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their noblest asked his presence. Then the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approaching her beloved father, spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I pray, dear father, give command to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A chariot ready for me, with high sides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sturdy wheels, to bear to the river-brink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to be cleansed, the costly robes that now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lie soiled. Thee likewise it doth well beseem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At councils to appear in vestments fresh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stainless. Thou hast also in these halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Five sons, two wedded, three in boyhood’s bloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever in the dance they need attire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New from the wash. All this must I provide.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She ended, for she shrank from saying aught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her own hopeful marriage. He perceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her thought and said: “Mules I deny thee not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My daughter, nor aught else. Go then; my grooms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall make a carriage ready with high sides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sturdy wheels, and a broad rack above.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and gave command. The grooms obeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, making ready in the outer court</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strong-wheeled chariot, led the harnessed mules</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the yoke and made them fast; and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared the maiden, bringing from her bower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shining garments. In the polished car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She piled them, while with many pleasant meats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flavoring morsels for the day’s repast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her mother filled a hamper, and poured wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a goatskin. As her daughter climbed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The car, she gave into her hands a cruse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold with smooth anointing oil for her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her attendant maids. Nausicaä took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scourge and showy reins, and struck the mules</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To urge them onward. Onward with loud noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They went, and with a speed that slackened not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bore the robes and her⁠—yet not alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For with her went the maidens of her train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now when they reached the river’s pleasant brink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where lavers had been hollowed out to last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perpetually, and freely through them flowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pure water that might cleanse the foulest stains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They loosed the mules, and drove them from the wain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To browse the sweet grass by the eddying stream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took the garments out, and flung them down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dark water, and with hasty feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trampled them there in frolic rivalry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the task was done, and all the stains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were cleansed away, they spread the garments out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the beach and where the stream had washed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gravel cleanest. Then they bathed, and gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their limbs the delicate oil, and took their meal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the river’s border⁠—while the robes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the sun’s warm rays were growing dry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, when they were all refreshed by food,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mistress and maidens laid their veils aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And played at ball. Nausicaä the white-armed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began a song. As when the archer-queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diana, going forth among the hills⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sides of high Taÿgetus or slopes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Erymanthus⁠—chases joyously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boars and fleet stags, and round her in a throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frolic the rural nymphs, Latona’s heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is glad, for over all the rest are seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her daughter’s head and brow, and she at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is known among them, though they all are fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such was this spotless virgin midst her maids.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now when they were about to move for home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With harnessed mules and with the shining robes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carefully folded, then the blue-eyed maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pallas, bethought herself of this⁠—to rouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses and to bring him to behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bright-eyed maiden, that she might direct</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stranger’s way to the Phaeacian town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The royal damsel at a handmaid cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ball; it missed, and fell into the stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where a deep eddy whirled. All shrieked aloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great Ulysses started from his sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sat upright, discoursing to himself:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah me! upon what region am I thrown?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What men are here⁠—wild, savage, and unjust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hospitable, and who hold the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In reverence? There are voices in the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Womanly voices, as of nymphs that haunt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mountain summits, and the river-founts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the moist grassy meadows. Or perchance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am I near men who have the power of speech?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, let me then go forth at once and learn.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having said, the great Ulysses left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thicket. From the close-grown wood he rent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his strong hand, a branch well set with leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wound it as a covering round his waist.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then like a mountain lion he went forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That walks abroad, confiding in his strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In rain and wind; his eyes shoot fire; he falls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On oxen, or on sheep, or forest-deer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For hunger prompts him even to attack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flock within its closely guarded fold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such seemed Ulysses when about to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those fair-haired maidens, naked as he was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But forced by strong necessity. To them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His look was frightful, for his limbs were foul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sea-foam yet. To right and left they fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the jutting river-banks. Alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daughter of Alcinoüs kept her place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Pallas gave her courage and forbade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her limbs to tremble. So she waited there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses pondered whether to approach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bright-eyed damsel and embrace her knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And supplicate, or, keeping yet aloof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pray her with soothing words to show the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Townward and give him garments. Musing thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed the best to keep at distance still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And use soft words, lest, should he clasp her knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maid might be displeased. With gentle words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skilfully ordered thus Ulysses spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O queen, I am thy suppliant, whether thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be mortal or a goddess. If perchance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art of that immortal race who dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the broad heaven, thou art, I deem, most like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Dian, daughter of imperial Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shape, in stature, and in noble air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If mortal and a dweller of the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice happy are thy father and his queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice happy are thy brothers; and their hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must overflow with gladness for thy sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beholding such a scion of their house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enter the choral dance. But happiest he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond them all, who, bringing princely gifts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall bear thee to his home a bride; for sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never looked on one of mortal race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woman or man, like thee, and as I gaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wonder. Like to thee I saw of late,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Delos, a young palm-tree growing up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside Apollo’s altar; for I sailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Delos, with much people following me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a disastrous voyage. Long I gazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon it wonder-struck, as I am now⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For never from the earth so fair a tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had sprung. So marvel I, and am amazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At thee, O lady, and in awe forbear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To clasp thy knees. Yet much have I endured.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was but yestereve that I escaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the black sea, upon the twentieth day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So long the billows and the rushing gales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farther and farther from Ogygia’s isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had borne me. Now upon this shore some god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Casts me, perchance to meet new sufferings here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For yet the end is not, and many things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods must first accomplish. But do thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>queen, have pity on me, since to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I come the first of all. I do not know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A single dweller of the land beside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Show me, I pray, thy city; and bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some poor old robe to wrap me⁠—if, indeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In coming hither, thou hast brought with thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aught poor or coarse. And may the gods vouchsafe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee whatever blessing thou canst wish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Husband and home and wedded harmony.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no better, no more blessed state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than when the wife and husband in accord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Order their household lovingly. Then those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repine who hate them, those who wish them well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoice, and they themselves the most of all.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the white-armed maid Nausicaä said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Since then, O stranger, thou art not malign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of purpose nor weak-minded⁠—yet, in truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Olympian Jupiter bestows the goods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fortune on the noble and the base</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To each one at his pleasure; and thy griefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are doubtless sent by him, and it is fit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou submit in patience⁠—now that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast reached our lands, and art within our realm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt not lack for garments nor for aught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Due to a suppliant stranger in his need.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city I will show thee, and will name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its dwellers⁠—the Phaeacians⁠—they possess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city; all the region lying round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is theirs, and I am daughter of the prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcinoüs, large of soul, to whom are given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rule of the Phaeacians and their power.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the damsel, and commanded thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her fair-haired maids: “Stay! whither do ye flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My handmaids, when a man appears in sight?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye think, perhaps, he is some enemy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, there is no man living now, nor yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will live, to enter, bringing war, the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Phaeacians. Very dear are they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the great gods. We dwell apart, afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the unmeasured deep, amid its waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The most remote of men; no other race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath commerce with us. This man comes to us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wanderer and unhappy, and to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our cares are due. The stranger and the poor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are sent by Jove, and slight regards to them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are grateful. Maidens, give the stranger food</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drink, and take him to the river-side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bathe where there is shelter from the wind.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the mistress; and they stayed their flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade each other stand, and led the chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under a shelter as the royal maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daughter of stout Alcinoüs, gave command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid a cloak and tunic near the spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be his raiment, and a golden cruse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of limpid oil. Then, as they bade him bathe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the fresh stream, the noble chieftain said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Withdraw, ye maidens, hence, while I prepare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cleanse my shoulders from the bitter brine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to anoint them; long have these my limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Been unrefreshed by oil. I will not bathe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before you. I should be ashamed to stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unclothed in presence of these bright-haired maids.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; they hearkened and withdrew, and told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The damsel what he said. Ulysses then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Washed the salt spray of ocean from his back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his broad shoulders in the flowing stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wiped away the sea-froth from his brows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the bath was over, and his limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been anointed, and he had put on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The garments sent him by the spotless maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove’s daughter, Pallas, caused him to appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of statelier size and more majestic mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade the locks that crowned his head flow down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curling like blossoms of the hyacinth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when some skilful workman trained and taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Vulcan and Minerva in his art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Binds the bright silver with a verge of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And graceful is his handiwork, such grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Pallas shed upon the hero’s brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shoulders, as he passed along the beach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, glorious in his beauty and the pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of noble bearing, sat aloof. The maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Admired, and to her bright-haired women spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Listen to me, my maidens, while I speak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This man comes not among the godlike sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Phaeacian stock against the will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the gods of heaven. I thought him late</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of an unseemly aspect; now he bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A likeness to the immortal ones whose home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the broad heaven. I would that I might call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man like him my husband, dwelling here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here content to dwell. Now hasten, maids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And set before the stranger food and wine.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake; they heard and cheerfully obeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And set before Ulysses food and wine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The patient chief Ulysses ate and drank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full eagerly, for he had fasted long.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>White-armed Nausicaä then had other cares.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She placed the smoothly folded robes within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sumptuous chariot, yoked the firm-hoofed mules,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mounted to her place, and from the seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake kindly, counselling Ulysses thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now, stranger, rise and follow to the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to my royal father’s palace I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be thy guide, where, doubt not, thou wilt meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noblest men of our Phaeacian race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But do as I advise⁠—for not inapt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I deem thee. While we traverse yet the fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the tilth, keep thou among my train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of maidens, following fast behind the mules</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chariot. I will lead thee in the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when our train goes upward toward the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fenced with its towery wall, and on each side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embraced by a fair haven, with a strait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of narrow entrance, where our well-oared barques</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have each a mooring-place along the road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there round Neptune’s glorious fane extends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A market-place, surrounded by huge stones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dragged from the quarry hither, where is kept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rigging of the barques⁠—sail-cloth and ropes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oars are polished there⁠—for little reck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phaeacians of the quiver and the bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give most heed to masts and shrouds and ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well poised, in which it is their pride to cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foamy deep⁠—when there I would not bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rude taunts upon myself, for in the crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are brutal men. One of the baser sort</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perchance might say, on meeting us: ‘What man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Handsome and lusty-limbed, is he who thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follows Nausicaä? where was it her luck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find him? will he be her husband yet?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps she brings some wanderer from his ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stranger from strange lands, for we have here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No neighbors; or, perhaps, it is a god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called down by fervent prayer from heaven to dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Henceforth with her. ’T is well if she have found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A husband elsewhere, since at home she meets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her many noble wooers with disdain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are Phaeacians.’ Thus the crowd would say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it would bring reproach upon my name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I too would blame another who should do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The like, and, while her parents were alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without their knowledge should consort with men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before her marriage. Stranger, now observe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My words, and thou shalt speedily obtain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe-conduct from my father, and be sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon thy voyage homeward. We shall reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A beautiful grove of poplars by the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sacred to Pallas; from it flows a brook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round it lies a meadow. In this spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father has his country-grounds, and here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His garden flourishes, as far from town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one could hear a shout. There sit thou down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wait till we are in the city’s streets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at my father’s house. When it shall seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we are there, arise and onward fare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Phaeacian city, and inquire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where dwells Alcinoüs the large-souled king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father; ’tis not hard to find; a child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might lead thee thither. Of the houses reared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the Phaeacians there is none like that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which Alcinoüs the hero dwells.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou art once within the court and hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go quickly through the palace till thou find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mother where she sits beside the hearth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaning against a column in its blaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And twisting threads, a marvel to behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bright sea-purple, while her maidens sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind her. Near her is my father’s throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On which he sits at feasts, and drinks the wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like one of the immortals. Pass it by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clasp my mother’s knees; so mayst thou see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon and with joy the day of thy return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although thy home be far. For if her mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be kindly toward thee, thou mayst hope to greet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy friends once more, and enter yet again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy own fair palace in thy native land.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having said, she raised the shining scourge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And struck the mules, that quickly left behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The river. On they went with easy pace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even steps. The damsel wielded well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The reins, and used the lash with gentle hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that Ulysses and her train of maids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On foot could follow close. And now the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was sinking when they came to that fair grove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sacred to Pallas. There the noble chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses sat him down, and instantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prayed to the daughter of imperial Jove:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O thou unconquerable child of Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Aegis-bearer! hearken to me now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since late thou wouldst not listen to my prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What time the mighty shaker of the shores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursued and wrecked me! Grant me to receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pity and kindness from Phaeacia’s sons.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So prayed he, supplicating. Pallas heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prayer, but came not to him openly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awe of her father’s brother held her back;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he would still pursue with violent hate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, till he reached his native land.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
