<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book XXIII: Ulysses and Penelope After the Slaughter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-23" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Ulysses and Penelope After the Slaughter</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Descent of Penelope to the hall⁠—Her doubts of the identity of Ulysses removed by evident tokens given by Ulysses⁠—Her transport at their removal⁠—His narrative of his adventures⁠—Departure of Ulysses with his son, the herdsman, and the swineherd, to the country.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Up to the royal bower the matron went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With an exulting heart, to tell the queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That her beloved husband was within.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With knees that faltered not, and quick light step</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She went, and, standing by her mistress, said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Awake, Penelope, dear child, and see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thine own eyes what thou hast pined for long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses has returned; thy lord is here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though late, and he has slain the arrogant crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of suitors, who disgraced his house, and made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wealth a spoil, and dared insult his son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus discreet Penelope replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The gods, dear nurse, have made thee mad; for they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have power to change the wisest men to fools,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make the foolish wise, and they have warped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy mind once sound. How canst thou mock me thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amidst my sorrows, with such idle tales?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why wake me from the pleasant sleep that closed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My lids so softly? Never have I slept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So sweetly since Ulysses went from me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To that bad city, which no tongue should name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go, then; return into the lower rooms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had any of my women save thyself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought such a message to disturb my sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would have sent her back into the hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With angry words; thy years are thy excuse.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Eurycleia, the dear nurse, rejoined:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay, my dear child, I mock thee not. Most true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is that thy Ulysses has returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here he is at home, as I have said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stranger whom they scoffed at in the hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is he; and long Telemachus has known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he was here, but wisely kept from all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His father’s secret, till he should avenge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon those violent men their guilty deeds.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She ended, and her mistress, overjoyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang from her couch, embraced the aged dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wept, and said to her in winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Tell me, dear nurse, and truly, if indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses have returned as thou hast said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How smote he those proud suitors?⁠—he alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they so many, gathered in the hall.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus the well-beloved nurse replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I saw it not, nor knew of it. I heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the moanings of the slain, while we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maids, affrighted, sat in a recess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that well-vaulted chamber; the firm doors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Closed us all in, until at length thy son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent by his father, called me forth. I found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses standing midst the dead that lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaped on each other, everywhere along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The solid pavement. Thou wouldst have rejoiced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see him like a lion with the stains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of slaughter on him. Now the suitors lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the portals of the palace-court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he has kindled a great fire, and steeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In smoke the noble hall. He bade me come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To call thee. Follow me, that ye may give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your hearts to gladness⁠—for ye have endured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great sorrows both, and your long-cherished hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is now fulfilled. He hath returned alive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his dear home, and finds thee and his son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet in his palace, and hath terribly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avenged himself upon the guilty men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who under his own roof have done him wrong.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake the sage Penelope again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Beloved nurse, exult not overmuch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor rashly boast. Well is it known to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were he to come beneath this roof again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How welcome he would be to all, but most</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me and to the son to whom we gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His being. Yet thy tidings are not true.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Someone of the immortals must have slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arrogant suitors, angry to behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their foul injustice and their many crimes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For no respect had they to mortal man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good he might be, or bad, whome’er they met;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore have they made an evil end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But my Ulysses must have perished far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Ithaca, cut off from his return.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Eurycleia, the dear nurse, rejoined:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What words are these, my child, that pass thy lips?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sayst thou, then, that thy husband, who now stands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon thy hearthstone, never will return?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O slow of faith! but thou wert ever thus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, then, I give a certain proof. I saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself, when he was at the bath, the scar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left on him by the white tusk of a boar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would have told thee, but he laid his hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon my mouth, and would not suffer me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear the tidings, such his forecast was.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now follow me; I give my life in pledge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I deceive thee, slay me ruthlessly.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake discreet Penelope again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dear nurse, though thou in many things art wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think not to scan the counsels of the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who live forever. Yet will we descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And meet my son, and look upon the slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see the avenger by whose hand they fell.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and from the royal bower went down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncertain whether she should stand aloof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And question there her lord, or haste to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clasp his hands in hers and kiss his brow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But having passed the threshold of hewn stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entering she took her seat right opposite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, in the full glow of the fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the other wall. Ulysses sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside a lofty column with his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast down, and waiting for his highborn wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To speak when she had seen him. Long she sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In silence, for amazement overpowered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her senses. Sometimes, looking in his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She saw her husband there, and then again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clad in those sordid weeds, she knew him not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then spake Telemachus, and chid her thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Mother, unfeeling mother! hard of heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou; how else couldst thou remain aloof?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How keep from taking, at my father’s side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy place, to talk with him, and question him?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No other wife could bring herself to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such distance from a husband, just returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After long hardships, in the twentieth year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of absence, to his native land and her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mother! thy heart is harder than a stone.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus the sage Penelope replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dear child, my faculties are overpowered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wonder, and I cannot question him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor even speak to him, nor fix my looks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his face. But if it be indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, and he have returned, we soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall know each other; there are tokens known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To both of us, to none but him and me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She ended, and the much-enduring chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, smiling at her words, bespake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus at once, in winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Suffer thy mother, O Telemachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To prove me; she will know me better soon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My looks are sordid, and my limbs are wrapped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tattered raiment, therefore does she think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanly of me, and cannot willingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Believe that I am he. But let us now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consider what most wisely may be done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He who hath slain, among a tribe of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A single one with few to avenge his death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flees from his kindred and his native land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we have slain the champions of the realm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flower of all the youth of Ithaca.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore, I pray thee, think what shall be done.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then discreet Telemachus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Look thou to that, dear father; for they say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou of all mankind wert wont to give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wisest counsels. None of mortal birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this was deemed thy peer. We follow thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With cheerful hearts; nor will our courage fail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think, in aught that lies within our power.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Then will I tell thee what I deem most wise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First take the bath, and then array yourselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tunics, bid the palace-maidens choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh garments; let the godlike bard, who bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clear-toned harp, be leader, and strike up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A melody to prompt the festive dance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all may say who hear it from without⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether the passers by or dwellers near⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘It is a wedding.’ Else throughout the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rumor of the slaughter we have wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the suitors may have spread before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We reach our wooded farm, and there consult</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the guidance of Olympian Jove.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; they hearkened and obeyed. They took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bath, and then they put their garments on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maids arrayed themselves; the godlike bard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took the curved harp, and woke in all the love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of melody, and of the graceful dance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spacious pile resounded to the steps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men and shapely women in their mirth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one who stood without was heard to say:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Someone, no doubt, has made the long-wooed queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bride at last; a worthless woman she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who could not, for the husband of her youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep his fair palace till he came again.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such words were said, but they who uttered them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew little what had passed. Eurynomè,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The matron of the palace, meantime took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Magnanimous Ulysses to the bath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his own dwelling, smoothed his limbs with oil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And threw a gorgeous mantle over him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tunic. Pallas on the hero’s head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shed grace and majesty; she made him seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taller and statelier, made his locks flow down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In curls like blossoms of the hyacinth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a workman skilled in many arts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And taught by Pallas and Minerva, twines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A golden border round the silver mass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A glorious work; so did the goddess shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grace o’er his face and form. So from the bath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stepped, like one of the immortals, took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seat from which he rose, right opposite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Penelope, and thus addressed the queen:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lady, the dwellers of the Olympian heights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have given thee an impenetrable heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond all other women. Sure I am</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No other wife could bring herself to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such distance from a husband just returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After long hardships, in the twentieth year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of absence, to his native land and her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, nurse, prepare a bed, where by myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I may lie down; an iron heart is hers.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To this the sage Penelope replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay, sir, ’tis not through pride or disregard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or through excess of wonder, that I act</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus toward thee. Well do I remember thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou wert in the day when thy good ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore thee from Ithaca. Bestir thyself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dame Eurycleia, and make up with care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bed without the chamber, which he framed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his own hands; bear out the massive bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lay upon it seemly coverings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleeces and mantles for his nightly rest.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake to try her husband; but, displeased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses answered thus his virtuous queen:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O woman, thou hast said unwelcome words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hath displaced my bed? That task were hard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For long-experienced hands, unless some god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had come to shift its place. No living man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even in his prime of years, could easily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have moved it, for in that elaborate work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a mystery; it was I myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who shaped it, no one else. Within my court</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There grew an olive-tree with full-leaved boughs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tall and flourishing tree; its massive stem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was like a column. Round it I built up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A chamber with cemented stones until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The walls were finished; then I framed a roof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above it, and put on the well-glued doors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close fitting. Next I lopped the full-leaved boughs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, cutting off the trunk above the root,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoothed well the stump with tools, and made of it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A post to bear the couch. I bored the wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wimbles, placed on it the frame, and carved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The work till it was done, inlaying it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With silver, gold, and ivory. I stretched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon it thongs of oxhide brightly dyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In purple. Now, O wife, I cannot know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether my bed remains as then it was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or whether someone from the root has hewn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The olive trunk, and moved it from its place.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and her knees faltered and her heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was melted as she heard her lord recount</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tokens all so truly; and she wept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rose, and ran to him, and flung her arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About his neck, and kissed his brow, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ulysses, look not on me angrily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou who in other things art wise above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All other men. The gods have made our lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hard one, jealous lest we should have passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our youth together happily, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have reached old age. I pray, be not incensed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor take it ill that I embraced thee not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As soon as I beheld thee, for my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has ever trembled lest someone who comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into this isle should cozen me with words;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they who practise fraud are numberless.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Argive Helen, child of Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would ne’er have listened to a stranger’s suit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loved him, had she known that in the years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To come the warlike Greeks would bring her back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her own land. It was a deity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who prompted her to that foul wrong. Her thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was never of the great calamity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which followed, and which brought such woe on us.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, since thou, by tokens clear and true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast spoken of our bed, which human eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has never seen save mine and thine, and those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one handmaiden only, Actoris⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her whom my father gave me when I came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this thy palace, and who kept the door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our close chamber⁠—thou hast won my mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To full belief, though hard it was to win.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and he was moved to tears; he wept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in his arms he held his dearly loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And faithful wife. As welcome as the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To those who swim the deep, of whose stout barque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neptune has made a wreck amidst the waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tossed by the billow and the blast, and few</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are those who from the hoary ocean reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shore, their limbs all crested with the brine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These gladly climb the sea-beach, and are safe⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So welcome was her husband to her eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor would her fair white arms release his neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there would rosy-fingered Morn have found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both weeping, but the blue-eyed Pallas planned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thus it should not be; she stayed the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When near its close, and held the golden Morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long in the ocean deeps, nor suffered her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To yoke her steeds that bring the light to men⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lampas and Phaëthon, swift steeds that bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Morning on her way. Ulysses then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man of forecast, thus bespake his queen:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Not yet, O wife, have we attained the close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all our labors. One remains which yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must achieve, toilsome, and measureless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In difficulty; for so prophesied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spirit of Tiresias, on the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When to the abode of Pluto I went down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ask the seer concerning the return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my companions, and my own. But now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek we our couch, dear wife, that, softly laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We may refresh ourselves with welcome sleep.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake in turn the sage Penelope:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whenever thou desirest it thy couch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall be made ready, since the gods vouchsafe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring thee back into thy pleasant home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to thy native land. But now that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast spoken of it, and some deity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is prompting thee, declare what this new task</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May be. Hereafter I shall hear of it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No doubt, nor were it worse to know it now.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dear wife, why wilt thou ask? why press me thus?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet will I tell thee truly, nor will keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aught from thee, though thou wilt not gladly hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor I relate. Tiresias bade me pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through city after city, till I found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A people who know not the sea, nor eat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their food with salt, who never yet beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The red-prowed galley, nor the shapely oars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which are the wings of ships. And this plain sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave, nor will I keep it back from thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That when another traveller whom I meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall say it is a winnowing-fan I bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On my stout shoulder, there he bade me plant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The oar upright in earth, and offer up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To monarch Neptune there a ram, a bull,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sturdy boar, and then, returning home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burn hallowed hecatombs to all the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who dwell in the broad heaven, each one in turn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last will death come over me, afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From ocean, such a death as peacefully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall take me off in a serene old age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid a people prosperous and content.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this, the prophet said, will come to pass.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the sage Penelope rejoined:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If thus the immortals make thy later age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The happier, there is hope that thou wilt find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Escape from evil in the years to come.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So talked they with each other. Meantime went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eurynomè, attended by the nurse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the light of blazing torches dressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With soft fresh drapery a bed; and when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their busy hands had made it full and high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aged dame withdrew to take her rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her own chamber, while Eurynomè,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who kept the royal bower, upheld a torch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thither led the pair, and, when they both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were in the chamber, went her way. They took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their place delighted in the ancient bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prince, the herdsman, and the swineherd ceased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime to tread the dance, and bade the maids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cease also, and within the palace-rooms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark with night’s shadow, sought their place of rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then came the time of pleasant mutual talk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which that noblest among women spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wrongs endured beneath her roof from those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who came to woo her⁠—an insatiate crew⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who made of beeves and fatlings of the flock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large slaughter, and drained many a wine-cask dry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then nobly born Ulysses told what woes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His valor brought on other men; what toils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And suffering he had borne; he told her all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she, delighted, heard him, nor did sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light on her eyelids till his tale was done.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And first he told her how he overcame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people of Ciconia; how he passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence to the rich fields of the race who feed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the lotus; what the Cyclops did,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how upon the Cyclops he avenged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The death of his brave comrades, whom the wretch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had piteously slaughtered and devoured.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how he came to Aeolus, and found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A friendly welcome, and was sent by him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his voyage; yet ’twas not his fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To reach his native land; a tempest caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fleet, and far across the fishy deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore him away, lamenting bitterly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how he landed at Telepylus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Laestrigonians, who destroyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His ships and warlike comrades, he alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his black ship escaping. Then he told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Circè, her deceit and many arts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how he went to Pluto’s dismal realm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his good galley, to consult the soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him of Thebes, Tiresias, and beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All his lost comrades and his mother⁠—her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who brought him forth, and trained him when a child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how he heard the Sirens afterward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how he came upon the wandering rocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The terrible Charybdis, and the crags</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Scylla⁠—which no man had ever passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In safety; how his comrades slew for food</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The oxen of the Sun; how Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Thunderer, with a bolt of fire from heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote his swift barque; and how his gallant crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All perished, he alone escaped with life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how he reached Ogygia’s isle, he told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And met the nymph Calypso, who desired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he would be her husband, and long time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Detained and fed him in her vaulted grot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And promised that he ne’er should die, nor know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decay of age, through all the days to come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet moved she not the purpose of his heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how he next through many hardships came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Phaeacians, and they welcomed him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And honored him as if he were a god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to his native country in a barque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent him with ample gifts of brass and gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And raiment. As he uttered this last word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleep softly overcame him; all his limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay loose in rest, and all his cares were calmed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The blue-eyed Pallas had yet new designs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when she deemed Ulysses was refreshed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With rest and sleep, in that accustomed bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She called the Morning, daughter of the Dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rise from ocean in her car of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shed her light on men. Ulysses rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his soft couch, and thus enjoined his spouse:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O wife! enough of misery have we borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already⁠—thou in weeping for my long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhappy absence⁠—I for years withheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Jupiter and all the other gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my return to this dear land, although</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I pined for home. Now since upon this couch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We take the place so earnestly desired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take thou the charge of all that I possess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in the palace. For the herds and flocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which those high-handed suitors have devoured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall seize many others as a spoil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rest the Greeks will bring me, till my stalls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are filled again. I hasten to my farm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embowered in trees, to greet the aged man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My excellent father, who continually</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grieves for me. Prudent as thou art, I give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This charge; a rumor, with the rising sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will quickly go abroad that I have slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitors in the palace. Now withdraw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou and thy maidens, to the upper room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sit and look not forth, nor ask of aught.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the chief, and on his shoulders braced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His glorious armor. Then he called his son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herdsman, and the swineherd, bidding them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take in hand their weapons. They obeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, having armed themselves in brass, they threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The portals open. As they all went forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses led the way. The early light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was on the earth, but Pallas, shrouding them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In darkness, led them quickly through the town.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
