<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 21: The Bending of the Bow of Ulysses</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Bending of the Bow of Ulysses</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Proposal of Penelope to the suitors to contend for her hand with the bow and arrows of Ulysses⁠—Their ineffectual attempts to bend the bow⁠—Management of Ulysses to obtain the bow, which he bends with ease, and sends an arrow through the twelve rings set up in a row for the purpose.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-21" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Pallas, the goddess of the azure eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woke in the mind of sage Penelope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The daughter of Icarius, this design⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To put into the suitors’ hands the bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gray steel rings, and to propose a game</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in the palace was to usher in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The slaughter. So she climbed the lofty stair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up from the hall, and took in her plump hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fair carved key; its wards were wrought of brass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ivory was the handle. Soon she reached</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The furthest room with her attendant maids.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There lay the treasures of Ulysses⁠—brass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gold, and steel divinely wrought. There lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His bow unstrung; there lay his quiver charged</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With arrows; many were the deadly shafts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It held, a stranger’s gift, who met him once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Lacedaemon, Iphitus by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The son of Eurytus, and like the gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In presence. In Messenè met the twain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the mansion of Orsilochus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The warlike. Thither had Ulysses come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To claim a debt from all the region round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For rovers from Messene to their ships</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had driven and carried off from Ithaca</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three hundred sheep and those who tended them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For this Ulysses, though a stripling yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came that long voyage, on an embassy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sent by his father and the other chiefs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Iphitus had come in search of steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he had lost⁠—twelve mares, and under them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twelve hardy mules, their foals. That errand brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The doom of death upon him. For he came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In journeying, to the abode of Hercules,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mighty hero-son of Jupiter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Famed for his labors, who, in his own house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slew Iphitus, the stranger. Cruel wretch!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who reverenced not the vengeance of the gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor what was due to his own board, at which</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He placed his guest, and slew him afterward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his stables kept the goodly mares.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T was when this guest was seeking for his steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He met Ulysses, and bestowed on him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bow, which mighty Eurytus once bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dying in his lofty palace left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weapon to his son. Ulysses gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In turn a trenchant sword and massive lance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pledge of kindly hospitality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begun, but not continued till they sat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each at the other’s table; for the son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Jove first took the life of him who gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bow, the godlike son of Eurytus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bow Ulysses, when he went to war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his black galleys, never took with him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But left it in his palace, to be kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In memory of a beloved friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And only bore it in his own domain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now when the glorious lady reached the room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stood upon the threshold, wrought of oak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And polished by the workman’s cunning hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who stretched the line upon it, and set up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its posts, and hung its shining doors, she loosed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a quick touch the thong that held the ring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put in the key, and with a careful aim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Struck back the sounding bolts. As when a bull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roars in the field, such sound the beautiful doors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Struck with the key, gave forth, and instantly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They opened to her. Up the lofty floor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She stepped, where stood the coffer that contained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The perfumed garments. Reaching forth her hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The queen took down the bow, that hung within</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its shining case, and sat her down, and laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The case upon her knees, and, drawing forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The monarch’s bow, she wept aloud. As soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As that new gush of tears had ceased to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back to the hall she went, and that proud throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of suitors, bearing in her hand the bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unstrung, and quiver, where the arrows lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many and deadly. Her attendant maids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brought also down a coffer, where were laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much brass and steel, provided by the king</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For games like these. The glorious lady then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In presence of the suitors, stood beside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The columns that upheld the stately roof.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She held a lustrous veil before her cheeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, while on either side of her a maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood modestly, bespake the suitors thus:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Hear, noble suitors! ye who throng these halls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eat and drink from day to day, while long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My husband has been gone; your sole excuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all this lawlessness the claim ye make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I become a bride. Come then, for now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A contest is proposed. I bring to you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mighty bow that great Ulysses bore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoe’er among you he may be whose hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall bend this bow, and send through these twelve rings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An arrow, him I follow hence, and leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This beautiful abode of my young years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all its plenty⁠—though its memory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think, will haunt me even in my dreams.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She spake, and bade the master of the swine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The good Eumaeus, place the bow and rings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hoary steel before the suitor-train.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In tears he bore the bow and laid it down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The herdsman also wept to see again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His master’s bow. Antinoüs called to both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a loud voice, and chid them angrily:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ye silly rustics, who can never see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the hour, why trouble with your tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lady who had grief enough besides</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For her lost husband? Sit and share the feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In silence, or go forth and leave the bow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A difficult contest it will be for us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor, as I think, will this fair bow be bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With ease, since surely there is no man here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as Ulysses was. I saw him once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While but a child, and still remember him.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, yet in his secret heart believed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he should bend the bow, and send a shaft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all the rings. And yet he was the first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To taste the steel⁠—an arrow from the hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the great chief Ulysses⁠—whom he wronged</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his own palace, and to equal wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Encouraged others. Then Telemachus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose in his sacred might, and thus began:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Alas! it must be that Saturnian Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has made me lose my wits. Wise as she is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My mother promises to leave her home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And follow some one else, and yet I laugh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And am delighted in my foolish heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come then, since such a contest is proposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye suitors! and for such a woman too.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The like is not in all the lands of Greece,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Argos, Mycenae, or the hallowed shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Pylos, or in Ithaca itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the dark mainland coast. Ye know it well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I praise my mother? Come then, all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let there be no excuses for delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor longer leave the bow untried, that we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May see the event. I too am moved to try;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if I bend the bow, and send a shaft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all the rings, my gracious mother then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will not, to my great grief, renounce her home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, following another, leave me here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although my prowess even now might win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The glorious prizes that my father won.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake and, rising, from his shoulders took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The purple cloak, and laid the trenchant sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aside; and first he placed the rings of steel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In order, opening for them in the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A long trench by a line, and stamping close</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earth around them. All admired the skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which he ranged them, never having seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The game before. And then he took his place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the threshold, and essayed the bow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thrice he made the attempt, and thrice gave o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet hoping still to draw the cord, and send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An arrow through the rings. He would have drawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bow at the fourth trial, but a nod</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Given by his father caused him to forbear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though eager for the attempt. And then again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The princely youth bespake the suitors thus:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Well, this is strange! I may hereafter prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A craven and a weakling, or perchance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am yet too young, and cannot trust my arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do me right against the man who first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assaults me. Come then, ye whose strength excels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My own, and try the bow, and end the strife.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and setting down the bow to lean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the firm smooth panels of the wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the swift shaft against the bow’s fair curve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He took again his seat upon the throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From which he rose. And then Eupeithes’ son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Antinoüs, to the crowd of suitors said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Rise one by one, my friends, from right to left.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begin where he begins who pours the wine.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So spake Antinoüs, and the rest approved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then rose Leiodes, son of Oenops, first.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was their seer, and always had his seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside the ample bowl. From deeds of wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shrank with hatred, and was sore incensed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the suitors all. He took the bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shaft, and, going to the threshold, stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tried the bow, yet bent it not; it galled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hands, for they were soft, and all unused</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To such a task; and thus at length he spake:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O friends, I bend it not; another hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must try. This bow, upon this very spot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will take from many a prince the breath of life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And better were it thus to die, by far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than, living, fail of that intent for which</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We haunt this place, and still from day to day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assemble. There is many a one whose wish</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hope are strong to wed Penelope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The consort of Ulysses; but so soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he shall see and try the hero’s bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him with marriage presents seek to gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some other bride among the long-robed dames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achaia’s daughters. Let him leave the queen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wed the suitor who shall bring to her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The richest gifts, and him whom fate appoints.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and setting down the bow to lean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the firm smooth panels of the wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the swift shaft against the bow’s fair curve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He took again bis seat upon the throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From which he rose. Antinoüs then took up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The word and answered, and reproached him thus:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What words are these, Leiodes, that have passed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy lips? harsh words and fearful⁠—that this bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall take from many princes here the breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of life, and all because thou hast no power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bend it? Thy good mother bore thee not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To draw the bow and send the arrow forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But others of the noble suitor-train</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are here, by whom this bow shall yet be bent.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then to Melanthius, keeper of the goats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Antinoüs gave this bidding. “Light a fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With speed, Melanthius, in the palace here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And place a seat before it. Lay a fleece</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the seat, and bring us from within</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An ample roll of fat, that we young men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By warming and anointing may make soft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bow, and draw the cord, and end the strife.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake; Melanthius kindled instantly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A glowing fire, and near it placed a seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the seat a fleece, and from within</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brought forth an ample roll of fat, with which</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The young men, having warmed it, smeared the bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tried, but bent it not, too weak by far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For such a feat. Antinoüs kept aloof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He and the godlike youth Eurymachus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two princes who in might excelled the rest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The herdsman of Ulysses meantime left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The palace, and with him the swineherd went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after them Ulysses. When they all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were now without the gate and palace court,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ulysses spake to them, and blandly said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Herdsman and swineherd, shall I say to you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Somewhat, or shall I keep it back? My heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moves me to say it. Should Ulysses come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Led by some god, and suddenly, what aid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would he receive from you? Would ye take part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him, or with the suitors? Frankly speak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tell me what your hearts would bid you do.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then answered thus the keeper of the herds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O Father Jove! wouldst thou but grant my wish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let some god conduct him hither, then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall it be seen what might is in these hands!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So also did Eumaeus offer prayer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all the deities, that speedily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wise Ulysses might return; and when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chief perceived in all its truth the thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And purpose of their hearts, he spake and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Know, then, that I myself am he, at home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again, returning in the twentieth year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after many sufferings, to the land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That saw my birth. I know that I am come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Welcome to you alone of all my train</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of servants, since I hear no others pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For my return. Hear, then, what I engage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall be hereafter. If some god o’ercome</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me these arrogant suitors, I will give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To each of you a wife and lands, and build</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For each a house near mine, and ye shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The friends and brothers of Telemachus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thenceforth. And now, that ye may surely know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trust me, I will show a token here⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A scar which once the white tooth of a boar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made, when long since, on the Parnassian mount,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hunted with Autolycus’s sons.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus having said, he drew from the broad scar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The covering rags; they looked and knew it well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wept, and round Ulysses threw their arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kissed in that embrace the hero’s head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shoulders, while Ulysses also kissed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their heads and hands. The sun would have gone down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon their weeping, but for him. He said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Cease now from tears, lest some one from the hall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should see us, and report of us within.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now let us enter, not in company⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I first, and ye thereafter, one by one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let the sign be this: the others all⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The haughty suitors⁠—will refuse to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bow and quiver. When thou bearest it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My noble friend Eumaeus, through the halls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bring it and place it in my hands, and charge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The women to make fast the solid doors;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then if any one of them should hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A groan or other noise of men within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let her not issue forth, but silently</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pursue her task. Meantime be it thy care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My good Philoetius, with a key to lock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The portals of the court and fix the chain.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus having said, into that noble pile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He passed again, and took the seat from which</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lately rose, and afterward, in turn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entered the servants of the godlike chief.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eurymachus was busy with the bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turning and warming it before the blaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On both its sides. He could not bend it thus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came a deep sigh from his boastful heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And greatly was he vexed, and sadly said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Alas! great cause of grief indeed is here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me and all. ’T is not that I lament</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much the losing of the bride, although</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That also vexes me⁠—there yet remain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many fair ladies of the Achaian stock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both in the sea-girt lands of Ithaca</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And other regions⁠—yet if we be found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fall in strength of arm so far below</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The great Ulysses that we cannot bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His bow, our sons will hear of it with shame.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eupeithes’ son, Antinoüs, answered thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Not so, Eurymachus, as thou thyself</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shouldst know. This day is held a solemn feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Phoebus by the people. Who would draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bow to-day? Nay, lay it by in peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suffer all the rings to stand as now;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For no man, as I think, will dare to come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the palace of Laertes’ son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And take them hence. Let him who bears the cup</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begin to serve the wine, that, having poured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Part to the gods, we may lay down the bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the morning let Melanthius come⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goatherd⁠—bringing with him from the flock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The choicest goats, that we may burn the thighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An offering to the god of archery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apollo. Then will we again essay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bow, and bring the contest to an end.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So spake Antinoüs, and they all approved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then heralds came, and on the suitors’ hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poured water; youths filled up the cups with wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beginning at the right, and gave to each</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His share; and when they all had poured a part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each had drunk, the shrewd Ulysses thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With artful speech bespake the suitor-train:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Hearken, ye suitors of the illustrious queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To what ray heart is prompting me to say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But chiefly to Eurymachus I make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My suit, and to Antinoüs, who so well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath counselled to lay by the bow and trust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gods. To-morrow Phoebus will bestow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The needed strength on whomsoe’er he will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let me take that polished bow, and try</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among you, whether still the power that dwelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In these once pliant limbs abides in them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or whether happily it has passed from me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid my wanderings and a life of want.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and all were vehemently moved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With anger, for they feared that he would bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bow, and thus Antinoüs, railing, spake:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou worthless vagabond, without a spark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of reason, art thou not content to sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And banquet with the proudest, where no part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the feast escapes thee, hearing all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we are saying, which no other man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stranger and beggar, is allowed to hear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This good wine makes thee foolish, as wine oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes those who swallow it too greedily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drink not with due stint. It maddened once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eurytion, the famed Centaur, in the halls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the large-souled Pirithoüs. He had come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the Lapithae, and when inflamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wine to madness, in those very halls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did lawless deeds. The heroes were incensed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They rushed upon him, dragged him through the porch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And out of doors, and there cut off his nose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ears, and he departed, frenzied still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bearing in bewilderment of mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His punishment, whence war arose between</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Centaurs and men; yet surely he had brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The evil on himself, when overcome</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wine. Such fearful mischief I foretell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will light on thee, if thou shouldst bend this bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor canst thou hope for favor here among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The people. We will send thee speedily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a black galley, to King Echetus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The enemy of human kind, from whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt find no escape. Drink, then, in peace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy wine, and seek no strife with younger men.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then spake the sage Penelope again:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Truly, Antinoüs, it becomes thee not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor is it just, to vex the stranger guests</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who seek the palace of Telemachus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost thou, then, think that, should this stranger bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proud as he is of his great strength of arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mighty bow that once Ulysses bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He leads me hence a bride? No hope of that</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is in his heart, and let no one of you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who banquet here allow a thought like that</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To vex him; ’t is a thing that cannot be.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then to the queen, Eurymachus, the son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Polybus, replied: “We do not fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sage daughter of Icarius, that this man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will lead thee hence a bride; it cannot be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We fear the speech of men and women both.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very meanest of the Achaian race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will say: ‘Degenerate men are these, who seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wed the consort of a glorious chief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not one of whom can draw the bow he bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now there comes a wandering beggar-man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who draws the bow with ease, and sends a shaft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all the rings of steel.’ Thus will they speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this will be to us a cause of shame!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And then the sage Penelope rejoined:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Eurymachus, it cannot be that those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should earn the general praise who make the wealth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a most worthy man their spoil, and bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dishonor on his house. The stranger’s frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is powerful and well knit; he claims to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of noble parentage. Now let him take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bow, and we will see the event; but this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I promise, and will make my promise good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he should bend it⁠—if Apollo give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him that glory⁠—he shall have from me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tunic and a cloak, fair garments both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a keen javelin, his defence against</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both dogs and men, a two-edged sword besides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sandals for his feet, and I engage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To send him whither he desires to go.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then spake discreet Telemachus again:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Mother, in all Achaia there is none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who has more power than I can claim, to grant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to deny the bow to whom I will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No one of those who rule the rugged coast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Ithaca, or isles where Elis breeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her mares, may interpose to thwart my will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If on the stranger I bestow the bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be his own, and bid him take it hence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withdraw, O queen, into thy bower; direct</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy household tasks, the distaff and the web,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bid thy maidens speed the work. The bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Belongs to men, and most to me; for here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within these walls, the authority is mine.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The queen, astonished, heard him and withdrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But kept her son’s wise sayings in her heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then ascending to her bower, among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her maids, she wept her well-beloved lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ulysses, till the blue-eyed Pallas came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And poured upon her lids the balm of sleep.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Meantime the worthy swineherd bore the bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hand, and all along the palace-halls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The suitor-crew were chiding him aloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus an insolent youth among them spake:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou awkward swineherd, whither goest thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the curved bow? Thy own fleet dogs which thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast reared shall soon devour thee, far from men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And midst thy herds of swine, if we find grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Phoebus and the other deathless gods.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such were their words; the swineherd where he stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Set down the bow in fear, for many a voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Called to him in the hall. On the other side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shouted Telemachus with threatening words:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Nay, father, carry on the bow, nor think</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stop at every man’s command; lest I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though younger than thyself, cast stones at thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chase thee to the fields, for I in strength</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excel thee. Would that I excelled as far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In strength of arm the suitors in these halls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then would I roughly through the palace-gates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drive many who are plotting mischief now.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and all with hearty laughter heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His words, and for their sake allowed their wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the prince to cool. The swineherd went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forward, along the hall, and, drawing near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wise Ulysses, gave into his hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bow; and then he called the nurse aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dame Eurycleia, and bespake her thus:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Sage Eurycleia, from Telemachus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I charge thee to make fast the solid doors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, if any of the maids should hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A groan or other noise of men within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let her not issue forth, but silently</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pursue the task in hand, and keep her place.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, nor were his words in vain. The dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made fast the doors of that magnificent hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While silently Philoetius hastened forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And locked the portals of the high-walled court.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cable of the bark of Byblos lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the portico⁠—it once had served</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A galley⁠—and with this the herdsman tied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The portals, and, returning, took the seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence he had risen, but ever kept his eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fixed on his lord. Ulysses, meantime, held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bow, and, turning it, intently eyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Side after side, and tried each part in turn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For fear that worms, while he was far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had pierced the horn. At this, a youth among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The suitors, turning to his neighbor, said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Lo an inspector and a judge of bows!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps he has a bow like that at home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else would make one like it. How he shifts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thing with busy hands from side to side⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vagabond, well trained in knavish tricks!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then also said another insolent youth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“May he in all things be as fortunate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As now, when he shall try to bend that bow!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such was their talk; but when the wary chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had poised and shrewdly scanned the mighty bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, as a singer, skilled to play the harp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretches with ease on its new fastenings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A string, the twisted entrails of a sheep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made fast at either end, so easily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ulysses bent that mighty bow. He took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drew the cord with his right hand; it twanged</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a clear sound as when a swallow screams.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The suitors were dismayed, and all grew pale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jove in loud thunder gave a sign from heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The much-enduring chief, Ulysses, heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With joy the friendly omen, which the son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of crafty Saturn sent him. He took up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A winged arrow, that before him lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a table, drawn; the others still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were in the quiver’s womb; the Greeks were yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feel them. This he set with care against</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The middle of the bow, and toward him drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cord and arrow-notch, just where he sat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, aiming opposite, let fly the shaft.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He missed no ring of all; from first to last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brass-tipped arrow threaded every one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to Telemachus Ulysses said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Telemachus, the stranger sitting here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath not disgraced thee. I have neither missed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rings, nor found it hard to bend the bow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor has my manly strength decayed, as these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who seek to bring me to contempt pretend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now the hour is come when we prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A supper for the Achaians, while the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet lasts, and after supper the delights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of song and harp, which nobly grace a feast.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and nodded to Telemachus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His well-beloved son, who girded on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His trenchant sword, and took in hand his spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, armed with glittering brass for battle, came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And took his station by his father’s seat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
