<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book XII: The Sirens, Scylla, and Charybdis</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-12" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Sirens, Scylla, and Charybdis</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Return of Ulysses to the island of Circè⁠—Her counsels respecting his homeward voyage⁠—The sirens⁠—Escape from Scylla and Charybdis⁠—His arrival at Trinacria⁠—Slaughter of the oxen of the Sun by his companions⁠—A tempest, in consequence, by which his companions all perish, and he only escapes by swimming to the island of Calypso.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>“Now when our barque had left Océanus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And entered the great deep, we reached the isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeaea, where the Morning, child of Dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abides, and holds her dances, and the Sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goes up from earth. We landed there and drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our galley up the beach; we disembarked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid us down to sleep beside the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waited for the holy Morn to rise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then when the rosy-fingered Morn appeared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The child of Dawn, I sent my comrades forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring from Circè’s halls Elpenor’s corse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where a headland stretched into the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We hewed down trees, and held the funeral rites</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many tears; and having there consumed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The body and the arms with fire, we built</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tomb, and reared a column to the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on its summit fixed a tapering oar.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“All this was duly done; yet was the news</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our return from Hades not concealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Circè. She attired herself in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came; her maids came with her, bringing bread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And store of meats and generous wine; and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the wise goddess, standing in the midst:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Ah, daring ones! who, yet alive, have gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down to the abode of Pluto; twice to die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is yours, while others die but once. Yet now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take food, drink wine, and hold a feast today,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with the dawn of morning ye shall sail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will show the way, and teach you all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its dangers, so that ye may not lament</span>
				<br/>
				<span>False counsels followed, either on the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or on the water, to your grievous harm.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She spake, and our confiding minds were swayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Easily by her counsels. All that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till set of sun we sat and banqueted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the abundant meats and generous wines;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the Sun went down, and darkness came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crew beside the fastenings of our barque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay down to sleep, while Circè took my hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led me apart, and made me sit, and took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her seat before me, and inquired of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I had seen. I told her faithfully,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the mighty goddess Circè said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Thus far is well; now needfully attend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To what I say, and may some deity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Help thee remember it! Thou first wilt come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where the Sirens haunt. They throw a spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er all who pass that way. If unawares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One finds himself so nigh that he can hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their voices, round him nevermore shall wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lisping children gather, welcoming</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His safe return with joy. The Sirens sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a green field, and charm with mellow notes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The comer, while beside them lie in heaps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bones of men decaying underneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shrivelled skins. Take heed and pass them by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First fill with wax well kneaded in the palm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ears of thy companions, that no sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May enter. Hear the music, if thou wilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let thy people bind thee, hand and foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the good ship, upright against the mast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round it wind the cord, that thou mayst hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ravishing notes. But shouldst thou then entreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy men, commanding them to set thee free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let them be charged to bind thee yet more fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With added bands. And when they shall have passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sirens by, I will not judge for thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which way to take; consider for thyself;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I tell thee of two ways. There is a pile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of beetling rocks, where roars the mighty surge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dark-eyed Amphitritè; these are called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Wanderers by the blessed gods. No birds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can pass them safe, not even the timid doves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which bear ambrosia to our father Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ever doth the slippery rock take off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Someone, whose loss the God at once supplies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep their number full. To these no barque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guided by man has ever come, and left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spot unwrecked; the billows of the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And storms of fire in air have scattered wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Timbers of ships and bodies of drowned men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One only of the barques that plough the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has passed them safely⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Argo</i>, known to all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By fame, when coming from Aeaeta home⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her the billows would have dashed against</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The enormous rocks, if Juno, for the sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jason, had not come to guide it through.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Two are the rocks; one lifts to the broad heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its pointed summit, where a dark gray cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broods, and withdraws not; never is the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear o’er that peak, not even in summer days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or autumn; nor can man ascend its steeps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or venture down⁠—so smooth the sides, as if</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man’s art had polished them. There in the midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the western side toward Erebus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There yawns a shadowy cavern; thither thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noble Ulysses, steer thy barque, yet keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So far aloof that, standing on the deck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A youth might send an arrow from a bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just to the cavern’s mouth. There Scylla dwells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fills the air with fearful yells; her voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cry of whelps just littered, but herself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A frightful prodigy⁠—a sight which none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would care to look on, though he were a god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twelve feet are hers, all shapeless; six long necks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hideous head on each, and triple rows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of teeth, close set and many, threatening death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And half her form is in the cavern’s womb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forth from that dark gulf her heads are thrust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To look abroad upon the rocks for prey⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dolphin, or dogfish, or the mightier whale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as the murmuring Amphitritè breeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In multitudes. No mariner can boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he has passed by Scylla with a crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unharmed; she snatches from the deck, and bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away in each grim mouth, a living man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Another rock, Ulysses, thou wilt see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lower height, so near her that a spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast by the hand, might reach it. On it grows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A huge wild fig-tree with luxuriant leaves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Below, Charybdis, of immortal birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draws the dark water down; for thrice a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She gives it forth, and thrice with fearful whirl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She draws it in. O, be it not thy lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To come while the dark water rushes down!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Neptune could not then deliver thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then turn thy course with speed toward Scylla’s rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pass that way; ’twere better far that six</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should perish from the ship than all be lost’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She spake, and I replied: ‘O goddess, deign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tell me truly, cannot I at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Escape Charybdis and defend my friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the rage of Scylla when she strikes?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake; the mighty goddess answered me:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Rash man! dost thou still think of warlike deeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feats of strength? And wilt thou not give way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even to the deathless gods? That pest is not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mortal mould; she cannot die, she is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thing to tremble and to shudder at,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fierce, and never to be overcome.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no room for courage; flight is best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if thou shouldst delay beside the rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take up arms, I fear lest once again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She fall on thee with all her heads, and seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As many men. Pass by the monster’s haunt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all the speed that thou canst make, and call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon Crataeis, who brought Scylla forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be the plague of men, and who will calm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her rage, that she assault thee not again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Then in thy voyage shalt thou reach the isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trinacria, where, in pastures of the Sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His many beeves and fading sheep are fed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven herds of oxen, and as many flocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sheep, and fifty in each flock and herd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They never multiply; they never die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two shepherdesses tend them, goddesses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nymphs with redundant locks⁠—Lampelia one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other Phaëthusa. These the nymph</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Naeëra to the overgoing Sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought forth, and when their queenly mother’s care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had reared them, she appointed them to dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In far Trinacria, there to keep the flocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oxen of their father. If thy thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be fixed on thy return, so that thou leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These flocks and herds unharmed, ye all will come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Ithaca, though after many toils.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if thou rashly harm them, I foretell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Destruction to thy ship and all its crew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if thyself escape, thou wilt return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Late and in sorrow, all thy comrades lost.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She spake; the Morning on her golden throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked forth; the glorious goddess went her way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the isle, I to my ship, and bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men embark and cast the hawsers loose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straight they went on board, and duly manned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The benches, smiting as they sat with oars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hoary waters. Circè, amber-haired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty goddess of the musical voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent a fair wind behind our dark-prowed ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gayly bore us company, and filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sails. When we had fairly ordered all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On board our galley, we sat down, and left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The favoring wind and helm to bear us on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus in sadness I bespake the crew:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘My friends! it were not well that one or two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone should know the oracles I heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Circè, great among the goddesses;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now will I disclose them, that ye all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether we are to die or to escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The doom of death, may be forewarned. And first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the wicked Sirens and their song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flowery bank she warns us. I alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May hear their voice, but ye must bind me first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With bands too strong to break, that I may stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upright against the mast; and let the cords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be fastened round it. If I then entreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bid you loose me, make the bands more strong.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus to my crew I spake, and told them all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they should know, while our good ship drew near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The island of the Sirens, prosperous gales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wafting it gently onward. Then the breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sank to a breathless calm; some deity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had hushed the winds to slumber. Straightway rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men and furled the sails and laid them down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the ship, and sat and made the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White with the beating of their polished blades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made of the fir-tree. Then I took a mass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wax and cut it into many parts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kneaded each with a strong hand. It grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warm with the pressure, and the beams of him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who journeys round the earth, the monarch Sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With this I filled the ears of all my men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From first to last. They bound me, in their turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upright against the mast-tree, hand and foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tied the cords around it. Then again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sat and threshed with oars the hoary deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when, in running rapidly, we came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So near the Sirens as to hear a voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From where they sat, our galley flew not by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unseen by them, and sweetly thus they sang:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘O world-renowned Ulysses! thou who art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glory of the Achaians, turn thy barque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Landward, that thou mayst listen to our lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No man has passed us in his galley yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere he has heard our warbled melodies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He goes delighted hence a wiser man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all that in the spacious realm of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks and Trojans by the will of Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endured we know, and all that comes to pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all the nations of the fruitful earth.’ ”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Twas thus they sang, and sweet the strain. I longed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To listen, and with nods I gave the sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To set me free; they only plied their oars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The faster. Then upsprang Eurylochus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Perimedes, and with added cords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound me, and drew the others still more tight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when we now had passed the spot, and heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more the melody the Sirens sang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My comrades hastened from their ears to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wax, and loosed the cords and set me free.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“As soon as we had left the isle, I saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mist and a mountain billow, and I heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thunder of the waters. From the hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my affrighted comrades flew the oars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deep was all in uproar; but the ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stopped there, for all the rowers ceased their task.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I went through all the ship exhorting them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With cheerful words, man after man, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Reflect, my friends, that we are not untried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In evil fortunes, nor in sadder plight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are we than when within his spacious cave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brutal Cyclops held us prisoners;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet through my valor we escaped, and through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My counsels and devices, and I think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ye will live to bear this day’s events</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In memory like those. Now let us act.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do all as I advise; go to your seats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the benches, smiting with your oars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These mighty waves, and haply Jove will grant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we escape the death which threatens us.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee, helmsman, I adjure⁠—and heed my words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since to thy hands alone is given in charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our gallant vessel’s rudder⁠—steer thou hence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From mist and tumbling waves, and well observe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rock, lest where it juts into the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou heed it not, and bring us all to wreck.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake, and quickly all obeyed my words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet said I naught of Scylla⁠—whom we now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not avoid⁠—lest all the crew in fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should cease to row, and crowd into the hold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then did I forget the stern command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Circè gave me, not to arm myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For combat. In my shining arms I cased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My limbs, and took in hand two ponderous spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And went on deck, and stood upon the prow⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there it seemed to me that Scylla first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would show herself⁠—that monster of the rocks⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seize my comrades. Yet I saw her not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though weary grew my eyes with looking long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eagerly upon those dusky cliffs.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sadly we sailed into the strait, where stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On one hand Scylla, and the dreaded rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charybdis on the other, drawing down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into her horrid gulf the briny flood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as she threw it forth again, it tossed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And murmured as upon a glowing fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The water in a caldron, while the spray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrown upward, fell on both the summit-rocks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when once more she swallowed the salt sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It whirled within the abyss, while far below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bottom of blue sand was seen. My men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew pale with fear; we looked into the gulf</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thought our end was nigh. Then Scylla snatched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Six of my comrades from our hollow barque,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The best in valor and in strength of arm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I looked to my good ship; I looked to them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw their hands and feet still swung in air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above me, while for the last time on earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They called my name in agony of heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when an angler on a jutting rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sits with his taper rod, and casts his bait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To snare the smaller fish, he sends the horn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a wild bull that guards his line afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the water, and jerks out a fish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And throws it gasping shoreward; so were they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uplifted gasping to the rocks, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scylla devoured them at her cavern’s mouth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretching their hands to me with piercing cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of anguish. ’Twas in truth the saddest sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever I have suffered and where’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have roamed the waters, that mine eyes have seen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Escaping thus the rocks, the dreaded haunt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Scylla and Charybdis, we approached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pleasant island of the Sun, where grazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The oxen with broad foreheads, beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flocks of sheep, the fatlings of the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who makes the round of heaven. While yet at sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I heard from my black ship the low of herds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In stables, and the bleatings of the flocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straightway came into my thought the words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the blind seer Tiresias, him of Thebes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of Aeaean Circè, who had oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warned me to shun the island of the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose light is sweet to all. And then I said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my companions with a sorrowing heart:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘My comrades, sufferers as ye are, give ear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall disclose the oracles which late</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tiresias and Aeaean Circè gave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goddess earnestly admonished me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to approach the island of the Sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose light is sweet to all, for there she said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some great misfortune lay in wait for us.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now let us speed the ship and pass the isle.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake; their hearts were broken as they heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bitterly Eurylochus replied:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Austere art thou, Ulysses; thou art strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exceedingly; no labor tires thy limbs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They must be made of iron, since thy will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Denies thy comrades, overcome with toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sleeplessness, to tread the land again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in that isle amid the waters make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A generous banquet. Thou wouldst have us sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the swiftly coming night, and stray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from the island, through the misty sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By night spring up the mighty winds that make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wreck of ships, and how can one escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Destruction, should a sudden hurricane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise from the south or the hard-blowing west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as, in spite of all the sovereign gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will cause a ship to founder in the deep?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us obey the dark-browed Night, and take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our evening meal, remaining close beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our gallant barque, and go on board again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When morning breaks, and enter the wide sea.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So spake Eurylochus; the rest approved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then I knew that some divinity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was meditating evil to our band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I bespake him thus in winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Eurylochus, ye force me to your will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since I am only one. Now all of you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bind yourselves to me firmly, by an oath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That if ye haply here shall meet a herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of beeves or flock of sheep, ye will not dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slay a single ox or sheep, but feed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contented on the stores that Circè gave.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake, and readily my comrades swore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I required; and when that solemn oath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was taken, to the land we brought and moored</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our galley in a winding creek, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fountain of sweet water. From the deck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stepped my companions and made ready there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their evening cheer. They ate and drank till thirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hunger were appeased, and then they thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those whom Scylla from our galley’s deck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snatched and devoured; they thought and wept till sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stole softly over them amid their tears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now came the third part of the night; the stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were sinking when the Cloud-compeller Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent forth a violent wind with eddying gusts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And covered both the earth and sky with clouds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And darkness fell from heaven. When Morning came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rosy-fingered daughter of the Dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We drew the ship into a spacious grot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were the seats of nymphs, and there we saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smooth fair places where they danced. I called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A council of my men, and said to them:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘My friends, in our good ship are food and drink;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abstain we from these beeves, lest we be made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To suffer; for these herds and these fair flocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are sacred to a dreaded god, the Sun⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The all-beholding and all-hearing Sun.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I spake, and all were swayed by what I said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full easily. A month entire the gales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blew from the south, and after that no wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save east and south. While yet we had our bread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ruddy wine, my comrades spared the beeves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved by the love of life. But when the stores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On board our galley were consumed, they roamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The island in their need, and sought for prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And snared with barbed hooks the fish and birds⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever came to hand⁠—till they were gaunt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With famine. Meantime I withdrew alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the isle, to supplicate the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If haply one of them might yet reveal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The way of my return. As thus I strayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the land, apart from all the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I found a sheltered nook where no wind came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prayed with washen hands to all the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who dwell in heaven. At length they bathed my lids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a soft sleep. Meantime, Eurylochus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fatal counsels thus harangued my men:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Hear, my companions, sufferers as ye are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The words that I shall speak. All modes of death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are hateful to the wretched race of men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this of hunger, thus to meet our fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the most fearful. Let us drive apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The best of all the oxen of the Sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sacrifice them to the immortal ones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who dwell in the broad heaven. And if we come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Ithaca, our country, we will there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Build to the Sun, whose path is o’er our heads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sumptuous temple, and endow its shrine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many gifts and rare. But if it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His will, approved by all the other gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sink our barque in anger, for the sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of these his high-horned oxen, I should choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sooner to gasp my life away amid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The billows of the deep, than pine to death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By famine in this melancholy isle.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So spake Eurylochus; the crew approved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then from the neighboring herd they drove the best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the beeves; for near the dark-prowed ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair broad-fronted herd with crooked horns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were feeding. Round the victims stood my crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, offering their petitions to the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held tender oak-leaves in their hands, just plucked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a tall tree, for in our good ship’s hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was no white barley now. When they had prayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slain and dressed the beeves, they hewed away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thighs and covered them with double folds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of caul, and laid raw slices over these.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wine had they not to pour in sacrifice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the burning flesh; they poured instead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Water, and roasted all the entrails thus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now when the thighs were thoroughly consumed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And entrails tasted, all the rest was carved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into small portions, and transfixed with spits.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Just then the gentle slumber left my lids.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hurried to the shore and my good ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, drawing near, perceived the savory steam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the burnt-offering. Sorrowfully then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I called upon the ever-living gods:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘O Father Jove, and all ye blessed gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who live forever, ’twas a cruel sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which ye lulled me to my grievous harm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My comrades here have done a fearful wrong.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lampetia, of the trailing robes, in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew to the Sun, who journeys round the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tell him that my crew had slain his beeves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus in anger he bespake the gods:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘O Father Jove, and all ye blessed gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who never die, avenge the wrong I bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the comrades of Laertes’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, who have foully slain my beeves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which I took delight whene’er I rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the starry heaven, and when again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sank from heaven to earth. If for the wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They make not large amends, I shall go down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hades, there to shine among the dead.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The cloud-compelling Jupiter replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Still shine, O Sun! among the deathless gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mortal men, upon the nourishing earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon will I cleave, with a white thunderbolt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their galley in the midst of the black sea.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This from Calypso of the radiant hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I heard thereafter; she herself, she said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had heard it from the herald Mercury.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When to the ship I came, beside the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sternly chid them all, man after man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet could we think of no redress; the beeves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were dead; and now with prodigies the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amazed my comrades⁠—the skins moved and crawled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flesh both raw and roasted on the spits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lowed with the voice of oxen. Six whole days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My comrades feasted, taking from the herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sun’s best oxen. When Saturnian Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought the seventh day, the tempest ceased; the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell, and we straightway went on board. We set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mast upright, and, spreading the white sails,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We ventured on the great wide sea again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When we had left the isle, and now appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No other land, but only sea and sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Saturn caused a lurid cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gather o’er the galley, and to cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its darkness on the deep. Not long our ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran onward, ere the furious west-wind rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blew a hurricane. A strong blast snapped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both ropes that held the mast; the mast fell back;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tackle dropped entangled to the hold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mast, in falling on the galley’s stern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dashed on the pilot’s head and crushed the bones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the deck he plunged like one who dives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the deep; his gallant spirit left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The limbs at once. Jove thundered from on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sent a thunderbolt into the ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, quaking with the fearful blow, and filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With stifling sulphur, shook my comrades off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the deep. They floated round the ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like seamews; Jupiter had cut them off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their return. I moved from place to place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still in the ship, until the tempest’s force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Parted the sides and keel. Before the waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The naked keel was swept. The mast had snapped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just at the base, but round it was a thong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made of a bullock’s hide; with this I bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mast and keel together, took my seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon them, and the wild winds bore me on.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The west-wind ceased to rage; but in its stead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The south-wind blew, and brought me bitter grief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I feared lest I must measure back my way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To grim Charybdis. All night long I rode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waves, and with the rising sun drew near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rock of Scylla and the terrible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charybdis as her gulf was drawing down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waves of the salt sea. There as I came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I raised myself on high till I could grasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lofty fig-tree, and I clung to it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As clings a bat⁠—for I could neither find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A place to plant my feet, nor could I climb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So distant were the roots, so far apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long huge branches overshadowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charybdis. Yet I firmly kept my hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till she should throw the keel and mast again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up from the gulf. They, as I waited long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came up again, though late⁠—as late as one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who long has sat adjudging strifes between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young suitors pleading in the marketplace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rises and goes to take his evening meal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So late the timbers of my barque returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrown from Charybdis. Then I dropped amid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dashing waves, and came with hands and feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On those long timbers in the midst, that they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might bear my weight. I sat on them and rowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With both my hands. The father of the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mortals suffered not that I should look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Scylla’s rock again, else had I not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Escaped a cruel death. For nine long days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I floated on the waters; on the tenth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods at nightfall bore me to an isle⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ogygia, where Calypso, amber-haired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty goddess, skilled in song, abides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who kindly welcomed me, and cherished me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should I speak of this? Here in these halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I gave the history yesterday to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to thy gracious consort, and I hate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tell again a tale once fully told.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
