<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 24: Conclusion</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-24" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Conclusion</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The souls of the suitors conducted to Hades by Mercury⁠—Agamemnon and Achilles in Hades⁠—Their meeting with the souls of the suitors, and narrative of Amphimedon⁠—Meeting and mutual recognition of Ulysses and his father in the orchard at Ithaca⁠—Insurrection of the Ithacans, with Eupeithes, the father of Antinoüs, at their head⁠—The revolt quelled, Eupeithes slain by Laertes and a lasting peace made between Ulysses and his subject.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Cyllenian Hermes summoned forth the souls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the slain suitors. In his hand he bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beautiful golden wand, with which at will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shuts the eyes of men, or opens them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From sleep. With this he guided on their way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ghostly rout; they followed, uttering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shrilly wail. As when a flock of bats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep in a dismal cavern, fly about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And squeak, if one have fallen from the place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, clinging to each other and the rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They rested, so that crowd of ghosts went forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With shrill and plaintive cries. Before them moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneficent Hermes through those dreary ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And past the ocean stream they went, and past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leucadia’s rock, the portals of the Sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And people of the land of dreams, until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They reached the fields of asphodel, where dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The souls, the bodiless forms of those who die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And there they found the soul of Peleus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friend Patroclus, and the blameless chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antilochus, and Ajax, who excelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In stature and in form all other Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save the great son of Peleus. These were grouped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around Achilles. Then approached the ghost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Agamemnon, Atreus’ son; he seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sorrow, and around him others stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in the palace of Aegisthus met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fate and died. The son of Peleus took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The word, and spake to Agamemnon thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Atrides, we had thought that Jove, who wields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thunder, favored thee, through all thy years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond all other men⁠—thou didst bear rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over so many and such valiant men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the plain of Troy, where we of Greece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endured such sufferings. Yet all too soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cruel doom of death, which no man born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of woman can escape, has fallen on thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, if amid the honors of thy sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That doom had overtaken thee, while yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Troy’s far realm, then would the assembled Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have built a tomb to thee! Thou wouldst have left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heritage of glory to thy son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now hast thou died a most unhappy death.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the soul of Agamemnon said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fortunate son of Peleus, godlike chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, who didst die upon the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ilium, far from Argos, while there fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around thee many of the bravest sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy and Greece, who fought for thee, and thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wert lying in thy mighty bulk, amid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whirlwinds of dust, forgetful evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of horsemanship. All that day long we fought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor stayed our hands till Jove, to part us, sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hurricane. When we had borne thee thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brought thee to the fleet, upon a bier</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We laid thee, pouring o’er thy shapely limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warm water, and anointing them with oil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round thee the Achaians stood in tears, hot tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cut their hair away. From ocean’s depth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy mother, when she heard the tidings, rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her immortal sea-nymphs. Mournfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came o’er the waves the sound of their lament.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trembled the Greeks with fear, and, rushing forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would have sought refuge in their roomy ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If Nestor, wise in ancient lore, and known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For counsels ever safe, had not restrained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their haste, and thus declared his prudent thought:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Stay, Argives, youths of Greece; think not of flight!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is his mother; from the sea she comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her dead son, and brings her deathless nymphs.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He spake; his words withheld the valiant Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From flight. And now around thee came and stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daughters of the Ancient of the Deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lamenting bitterly. Upon thy corse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They put ambrosial robes. The Muses nine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bewailed thee with sweet voices, answering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each other. Then wouldst thou have seen no one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the Argive host with eyes unwet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Muses’ song so moved them. Seventeen day?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nights we mourned thee⁠—both the immortal ones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mortals. On the eighteenth day we gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy body to the fire, and at the pile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slew many fatling ewes, and many an ox</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With crooked horns. In raiment of the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fire consumed thee midst anointing oils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And honey. Many heroes of our host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In armor and in chariots, or on foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contended round thy funeral pyre in games,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mighty was the din. And when at length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fires of Vulcan had consumed thy flesh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We gathered up at morning thy white bones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, pouring over them pure wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fragrant oils. Thy mother brought a vase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold, which Bacchus gave, she said, the work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Vulcan the renowned, and in it now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illustrious son of Peleus, thy white bones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are lying, and with thine are mingled those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dead Patroclus Menoetiades.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart we placed the ashes of thy friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antilochus, whom thou didst honor most</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the slain Patroclus. O’er all these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred army of the warlike Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Built up a tomb magnificently vast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a cape of the broad Hellespont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to be seen, far off upon the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By those who now are born, or shall be born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In future years. Thy mother, having first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prayed to the gods, appointed noble games,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the circus, for the Achaian chiefs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full often have I seen the funeral rites</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heroes, when the youth, their chieftain dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were girded for the games, and strove to win</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prizes; but I most of all admired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those which the silver-footed Thetis gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mark thy burial, who wert loved by all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The immortals. So thou hast not lost by death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy fame, Achilles, and among the tribes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men thy glory will be ever great;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what hath it availed me to have brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war on Ilium to an end, since Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doomed me to be destroyed on my return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain by Aegisthus and my guilty wife?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So talked they with each other. Now approached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herald Argus-queller, bringing down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The souls of suitors by Ulysses slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both chiefs moved toward them, wondering at the sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soul of Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew well-renowned Amphimedon, whose birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was from Melanthius, and by whom he once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was welcomed to his house in Ithaca;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And him the son of Atreus first bespake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Amphimedon, what sad mischance has brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You all, who seem like chosen men, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of equal age, into these drear abodes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the earth? ’Twere hard indeed to find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a whole city, nobler forms of men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has Neptune wrecked you in your ships at sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fierce winds and huge waves, or armed men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smitten you on the land, while carrying off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their beeves and sheep, or fighting to defend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your wives and city? Tell me, for I claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have been once your guest. Rememberest thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I lodged in thy own palace when I came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With godlike Menelaus, and besought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses to unite his gallant fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ours, and sail for Troy. A whole month long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were we in crossing the wide sea, and hard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We found the task to gain as our ally</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, the destroyer of walled towns.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The soul of dead Amphimedon replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Atrides Agamemnon, far renowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And king of men, I well remember all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which thou speakest; I will now relate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And truly, how we met our evil end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We wooed the wife of the long-absent chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses; she rejected not nor yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Granted our suit, detested as it was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, meditating our destruction, planned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This shrewd device. She laid upon the loom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within her rooms a web of delicate threads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ample in length and breadth, and thus she said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all of us: ‘Young princes, who are come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To woo me⁠—since Ulysses is no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My noble husband⁠—urge me not, I pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To marriage, till I finish in the loom⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That so my threads may not be spun in vain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A funeral vesture for the hero-chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laertes, when his fatal hour shall come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With death’s long sleep; else some Achaian dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might blame me, should I leave without a shroud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him who in life possessed such ample wealth.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such were her words, and easily they won</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon our generous minds. So went she on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weaving that ample web, and every night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unravelled it by torchlight. Three full years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She practised thus, and by the fraud deceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Grecian youths; but when the hours had brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fourth year round, a woman who knew all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revealed the mystery, and we ourselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw her unravelling the ample web.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thenceforth constrained, and with unwilling hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She finished it. And when at length she showed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vesture she had woven, the broad web</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she had bleached to brightness like the sun’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or like the moon’s, some hostile deity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought back Ulysses to a distant nook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his own fields, and to his swineherd’s lodge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thither also came in his black ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His son, returning from the sandy coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pylos. Thence the twain, when they had planned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slay the suitors, came within the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the great city; first Telemachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after him Ulysses, with his guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swineherd. He was clad in sordid weeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seemed a wretched beggar, very old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Propped on a staff. In that disguise of rags</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None knew him, as he suddenly appeared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even the oldest of us all. Harsh words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blows we gave him. He endured them all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awhile with patience, smitten and reviled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his own palace. Moved at length by Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He and his son Telemachus bore off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shining weapons from the hall, to lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a far chamber, and barred all the doors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, prompted by her husband’s craft, the queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proposed a game of archery, with bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rings of hoary steel, to all of us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ill-fated suitors. This drew on our death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not one of us could bend that sturdy bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None had the strength. But as it passed from us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into Ulysses’ hands, we loudly chid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bearer, and forbade him, but in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus alone with stern command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade him deliver it. When in his hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The much-enduring chief, Ulysses, took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bow, he drew the string with ease, and sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shaft through all the rings. He sprang and stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the threshold; at his feet he poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winged arrows, cast a terrible glance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around him, and laid King Antinoüs dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then sent the fatal shafts at those who stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him; side by side they fell and died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some god, we saw, was with them, as they rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon us mightily, and chased us through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace, slaying us on every side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fearful were the groans of dying men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As skulls were cloven, and the pavement swam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With blood. Such, Agamemnon, was the fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By which we perished. Now our bodies lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neglected at the palace; for not yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our kindred, dwelling in our homes, have heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tidings, nor have come to cleanse our wounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the dark blood, and lay us on the bier</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tears⁠—such honors as are due the dead.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In turn the soul of Agamemnon spake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Son of Laertes, fortunate and wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses! thou by feats of eminent might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And valor dost possess thy wife again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nobly minded is thy blameless queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daughter of Icarius, faithfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembering him to whom she gave her troth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet a virgin. Never shall the fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his great valor perish, and the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Themselves shall frame, for those who dwell on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet strains in praise of sage Penelope.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not such was she who treacherously slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The husband of her youth⁠—she of the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Tyndarus. Her name among mankind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall be the hateful burden of a song;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And great is the dishonor it has brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On women, even the faithful and the good.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So talked they with each other, standing there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Pluto’s realm beneath the vaulted earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime Ulysses, hastening from the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to the fair fields of Laertes, tilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With care. Laertes, after years of toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Acquired them. There his dwelling stood; a shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encircled it, where ate and sat and slept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The servants of the household, who fulfilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His slightest wish. An old Sicilian dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was there, who waited, in that distant spot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On her old master with assiduous care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then Ulysses to his followers said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Go into that fair dwelling, and with speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slay for our feast the fattest of the swine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I go to prove my father; I would learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether he knows me when he sees my face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or haply knows me not, so long away.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and laid his weapons in their hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straight toward the house they went. Ulysses passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the fruitful orchard, there to prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His father. Going down and far within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The garden-plot, he found not Dolius there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor any of the servants, nor his sons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All were abroad, old Dolius leading them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gathered thorns to fence the garden-grounds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, delving in that fertile spot, around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A newly planted tree, Ulysses saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His father only, sordidly arrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a coarse tunic, patched and soiled. He wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patched greaves of bullock’s hide upon his thighs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fence against the thorns; and on his hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>gloves, to protect them from the prickly stems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bramble; and upon his head a cap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of goatskin. There he brooded o’er his grief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him when the much-enduring chief beheld,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wasted with age and sorrow-worn, he stopped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside a lofty pear-tree’s stem and wept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pondered whether he should kiss and clasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His father in his arms, and tell him all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How he had reached his native land and home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or question first and prove him. Musing thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It pleased him to begin with sportive words;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus resolved, divine Ulysses drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near to his father stooping at his task,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loosening the hard earth about a tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus the illustrious son accosted him:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O aged man! there is no lack of skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tending this fair orchard, which thy care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keeps flourishing; no growth is there of fig,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vine, pear, or olive, or of plants that grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In borders, that has missed thy friendly hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet let me say, and be thou not displeased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art ill cared for, burdened as thou art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With years, and squalid, and in mean attire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It cannot be that for thy idleness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy master treats thee thus; nor is there seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aught servile in thy aspect⁠—in thy face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or stature; thou art rather like a king;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou seemest one who should enjoy the bath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And banquet, and lie soft⁠—for this befits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old men like thee. Now say, and tell me true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who may thy master be? whose orchard this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which thou dost tend? And, more than this, declare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For much I long to know, if I am come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Ithaca, as I just now was told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By one who met me as I came⁠—a man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not overwise, who would not stop to tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I desired to learn, nor bear to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My questions, when I asked him if a guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mine were living yet in health, or dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the realm of Pluto. Let me speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him, and mark me well, I pray; I lodged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once, in my native land, a man who came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into my house, and never stranger yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More welcome was than he. He was by birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ithaca, he said, Laertes’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grandson of Arcesias. Him I led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath my roof, and hospitably lodged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feasted in the plenty of my home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave such gifts as might become a host⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven talents of wrought gold, a silver cup</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All over rough with flowers, twelve single cloaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twelve mats, twelve mantles passing beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tunics twelve, and, chosen by himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twelve graceful damsels, skilled in household arts.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then his father answered, shedding tears:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou art indeed, O stranger, in the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which thou dost inquire, but wicked men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lawless now possess it. Thou hast given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy generous gifts in vain; yet hadst thou found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses living yet in Ithaca,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then would he have dismissed thee recompensed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gifts and liberal cheer, as is the due</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him who once has been our host. Yet say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And truly say, how many years have passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thou didst lodge my son, if he it was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy hapless guest, whom, far away from home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all his friends, the creatures of the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the foul birds of air, and beasts of prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already have devoured. No mother mourned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His death and wrapped him in his shroud, nor I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His father; nor did chaste Penelope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His consort nobly dowered, bewail the man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She loved upon his bier with eyes dissolved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tears, as fitting was⁠—an honor due</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To those who die. Now, further, truly tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I would learn, what is thy name, and whence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou comest, from what tribe, thy city where,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who thy parents. Where is the good ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At anchor which has brought thee and thy friends?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hast thou landed from another’s barque,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which put thee on the shore and left the isle?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I will tell all and truly. I am come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Alybas; a stately dwelling there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is mine, Apheidas is my father, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of royal Polypemon, and my name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eperitus. Some deity has warped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My course astray from the Sicanian coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brought me hitherward against my will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My barque lies yonder, stationed by the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from the city. This is the fifth year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since parting with me thy Ulysses left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My native land for his, ill-fated man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet there were flights of birds upon the right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of happy presage as he sailed, and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dismissed him cheerfully, and cheerfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He went. We hoped that we might yet become</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each other’s guests, exchanging princely gifts.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and a dark cloud of sorrow came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over Laertes. With both hands he grasped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yellow dust, and over his white head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shed it with piteous groans. Ulysses felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heart within him melted; the hot breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed through his nostrils as he looked upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His well-beloved father, and he sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kissed and clasped him in his arms, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nay, I am he, my father; I myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am he of whom thou askest. I am come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mine own country in the twentieth year.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But calm thyself, refrain from tears, and grieve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more, and let me tell thee, in a word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have slain all the suitors in my halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so avenged their insolence and crimes.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then Laertes spake again, and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If now thou be Ulysses, my lost son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give some plain token, that I may believe.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“First, then, behold with thine own eyes the scar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which once the white tusk of a forest boar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inflicted on Parnassus, when I made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The journey thither, by thy own command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by my gracious mother’s, to receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gifts which her father, King Autolycus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once promised, when he came to Ithaca.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And listen to me further; let me name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trees which in thy well-tilled orchard grounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou gavest me; I asked them all of thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When by thy side I trod the garden walks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little boy. We went among the trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou didst name them. Of the pear thirteen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of the apple ten thou gavest me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forty fig-trees; and thou didst engage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give me fifty rows of vines, each row</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of growth to feed the winepress. Grapes are there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of every flavor when the hours of Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall nurse them into ripeness from on high.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; a trembling seized the old man’s heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knees, as he perceived how true were all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tokens which Ulysses gave. He threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round his dear son his arms. The hardy chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, drew him fainting to his heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the old man’s strength revived, and calm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came o’er his spirit, thus he spake again:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O father Jove, assuredly the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwell on the Olympian height, since we behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arrogant suitors punished for their crimes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet much I fear lest all the Ithacans</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throng hither, and send messages to rouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against us all the Cephallenian states.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Take courage; let no thought like that disturb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy mind; but let us hasten to the house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telemachus is there, with whom I sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herdsman and the swineherd, bidding them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make ready with all speed our evening meal.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus talked the twain, and toward the dwelling took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their way, and entering the commodious rooms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They found Telemachus, and by his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herdsman and the keeper of the swine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dividing for the feast the plenteous meats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mingling the dark wine. Then to the bath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came the Sicilian dame, and ministered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the large-souled Laertes, and with oil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anointed him, and wrapped a sumptuous cloak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About him. Pallas gave the monarch’s limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An ampler roundness; taller to the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood, and statelier. As he left the bath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His son beheld with wonder in his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So like a god Laertes seemed, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses said to him in winged words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Someone among the ever-living gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath surely shed, O father, on thy form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And aspect all this grace and majesty.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sage Laertes answered: “Father Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pallas and Apollo! would that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were now as when I took the citadel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Nericus, the strongly built, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seashore of Epirus, leading on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Cephallenians! With such strength as then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed for the fray, I would have met and fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suitors in the palace yesterday,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And struck down many lifeless in the hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And greatly would thy spirit have rejoiced.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So talked they with each other. When they all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ceased from their task, and saw their meal prepared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sat them down in order on the thrones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seats, and each put forth his hand and shared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The banquet Now approached an aged man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dolius, attended by his sons, who came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weary with toil, for the Sicilian dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nurse who reared them, went and summoned them⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She who in his late age with faithful care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cherished the father. These, when at the board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They saw Ulysses, and knew who he was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stopped in the hall astonished. Instantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses called to them with friendly words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sit at the board, old man; let none of you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give way to blank amazement. Know that we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though keen our appetite for this repast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have waited long, expecting your return.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and Dolius sprang with outstretched arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seized Ulysses by the hand, and kissed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wrist; and thus in winged words he spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Dear master! since thou art returned to us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who longed and yet expected not to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy face again⁠—since some divinity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has led thee hither⁠—hail! and great may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy happiness, and may the gods bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All blessings on thee! But declare, for I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would gladly know, if sage Penelope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have heard the tidings yet of thy return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or must we send them by a messenger.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My aged friend, she knows already all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why wouldst thou take that care upon thyself?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and Dolius on a polished seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat down, but round the great Ulysses came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sons, and welcomed him with loving words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hung upon his hand, and then they took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their places by their father. So they sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath Laertes’ roof, and banqueted.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now through the city meantime swiftly ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rumor that the suitors all had met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bloody death. No sooner had men heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tidings than they came with cries and moans</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the palace, moving to and fro.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each carried forth his dead, and gave to each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His funeral rites, except to those who came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From distant cities; these they put on board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift-sailing galleys of the fishermen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they might bear them home. And then they came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sorrowing together in the marketplace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, when the assembly now was full, arose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eupeithes and addressed them. In his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was sorrow, that could never be consoled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his slain son Antinoüs, who was first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fall before Ulysses. Weeping rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The father, and harangued the assembly thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Great things, indeed, my friends, hath this man done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For us Achaians. Many valiant men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gathered in his ships and led abroad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lost his gallant ships, and lost his men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, returning, he has put to death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The best of all the Cephallenian race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, then, and ere he find a safe retreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Pylos, or in hallowed Elis, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Epeians rule, pursue him; endless shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be our portion else, and they who live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In future years will hear of our disgrace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we avenge not on these men of blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The murder of our sons and brothers, life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not be sweet to me, and I would go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once, and gladly, down among the dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise, then, and fall upon them ere they flee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, weeping; and the Greeks were moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pity as they heard him. Now appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herald Medon and the sacred bard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As, rising from the sleep of night, they left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace of Ulysses. They stood forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the multitude, who all beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wonder. Then sagacious Medon spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Give ear, ye men of Ithaca, and know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That not without the approval of the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses hath done this. I saw, myself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the immortals taking part with him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all things like to Mentor. Now the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standing before Ulysses strengthened him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For combat, and now drove the routed band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of suitors through the hall; in heaps they fell.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and all who heard were pale with fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aged hero, Halitherses, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Mastor, then came forward; he alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew what was past and what was yet to come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, wisely judging, to the assembly said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear now my words, ye men of Ithaca.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through your own wrong all this has come to pass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me ye would not hearken, nor obey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Mentor, shepherd of the people, spake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the mad doings of your sons ye put</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No curb, nor checked the guilty insolence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That dared to waste the substance and insult</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The consort of a man of eminent worth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, so they thought, would nevermore return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now be it as I counsel; let us not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go forth to draw down evil on our heads.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; but more than half the assembly rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abroad with shouts; the others kept their place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together. Ill the augur’s speech had pleased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The most. Eupeithes had persuaded them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They flew to arms, and when they had put on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glittering brass, they mustered in close ranks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the spacious city. At their head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eupeithes led them on, who madly deemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself the avenger of his slaughtered son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet he from that encounter nevermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was to return; his fate o’ertook him there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Pallas thus addressed Saturnian Jove:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Our Father, son of Saturn, king of kings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me, I pray, the purpose of thy heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet unrevealed. Shall there be cruel war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And deadly combats, or wilt thou ordain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That these shall henceforth dwell in amity?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And cloud-compelling Jove made answer thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My child, why ask me? Was it not with thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cherished purpose, that, returning home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses amply should avenge himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the suitors? Do, then, as thou wilt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet this, as the most fitting, I advise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now that the great Ulysses has avenged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wrongs, let there be made a faithful league</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With oaths, and let Ulysses ever reign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we will cause the living to forget</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sons and brothers slain, and all shall dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In friendship as they heretofore have dwelt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there shall be prosperity and peace.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and eager as she was before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encouraged by his words, the goddess plunged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down from the summits of the Olympian mount</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now when they all had feasted to the full,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The much-enduring chief, Ulysses, said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Go, one of you, and see if they are near.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; a son of Dolius at his word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went forth, and, coming to the threshold, stopped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw them all at hand, and instantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bespake Ulysses thus, with winged words:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“They are upon us; we must arm at once.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; they rose, and quickly were in arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four were Ulysses and his friends, and six</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons of Dolius. Old Laertes then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Dolius, put on armor with the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gray-headed as they were, for now their aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was needed. When they all had clad themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shining brass, they threw the portals wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sallied forth, Ulysses at their head.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now Pallas, daughter of almighty Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew near them. She had taken Mentor’s form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Mentor’s voice. The much-enduring chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, saw her and rejoiced, and said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his beloved son, Telemachus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now wilt thou, of thyself, Telemachus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bethink thee, when thou minglest in the fray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That tries men’s valor, not to cast disgrace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon thy forefathers⁠—a race renowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For manly daring over all the earth.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus discreet Telemachus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay, if thou wilt, my father, thou shalt see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That by no lack of valor shall I cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou hast said, dishonor on thy race.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Laertes heard them, and rejoiced, and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O what a day for me, ye blessed gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is this! With what delight I see my son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grandson rivals on the battlefield.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the blue-eyed Pallas, drawing near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laertes, said: “Son of Arcesias, loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By me beyond all others of my friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pray to Jove’s blue-eyed daughter, and to Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brandish thy long spear, and send it forth.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Pallas spake, and breathed into his frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strength irresistible. The aged chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prayed to the daughter of almighty Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brandished his long spear and sent it forth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It smote Eupeithes on the helmet’s cheek.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brass stayed not the spear, the blade passed through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heavily Eupeithes fell to earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His armor clashing round him as he fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then rushed Ulysses and his valiant son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forward, the foremost of their band, and smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their foes with swords and lancet double-edged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would have struck them down to rise no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If Pallas, daughter of the god who bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aegis, had not with a mighty voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commanded all the combatants to cease:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Stay, men of Ithaca; withhold your hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From deadly combat. Part, and shed no blood.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Pallas spake, and they grew pale with awe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fear-struck; as they heard her words they dropped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their weapons all upon the earth. They fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Townward as if for life, while terribly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The much-enduring chief Ulysses raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His voice, and shouted after them, and sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon them as an eagle darts through air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Saturn’s son sent down a bolt of fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It fell before his blue-eyed daughter’s feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus the goddess to Ulysses called:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Son of Laertes, nobly born and wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, hold thy hand; restrain the rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of deadly combat, lest the god who wields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thunder, Saturn’s son, be wroth with thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and gladly he obeyed; and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pallas, the child of aegis-bearing Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plighted, in Mentor’s form with Mentor’s voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A covenant of peace between the foes.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
